 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00642 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 20, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on June 12, 2014. The Government offered exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(GE) 1 and 2, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 23, 
2014.  
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to reflect information disclosed 
on Applicant’s Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing. Department 
Counsel requested the date in SOR ¶ 1.a be changed from 1989 to 1984. Applicant did 
not object and the motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1991. He married in 
1997 and has three children, ages twelve, ten, and seven. He has never held a security 
clearance.1  
 
 Applicant admitted he began using marijuana when he was in middle school in 
approximately 1984, when he was between 14 and 15 years old. He continued using 
marijuana in high school. During his college years his frequency of use was at its peak, 
and he used marijuana about two to three times a week, sometimes less. After college 
he used it about three to five times a year. He stated that since about 2001, he used 
marijuana about one to three times every two to three years. He indicated he last used 
marijuana in April 2013.2 
 
Applicant was arrested in 1989 for possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia. He was 20 years old and received a citation. The possession charge was 
dismissed and he pled nolo contendre to possession of drug paraphernalia. He received 
a fine, one day of community service, and was required to attend a three-day drug 
program. He completed the terms of his sentence. He resumed using marijuana about 
six to seven months later.3  
 
Applicant’s wife also uses marijuana. She used it in college and after they 
married she would use it with the same frequency as him. They would use it together 
with friends and neighbors, but never consumed it in their home and never purchased it. 
                                                          
1 Tr. 18-20. 
 
2 Tr. 29-34. 
 
3 Tr. 45-48. This information is not considered for disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when 
analyzing Applicant’s credibility and in the “whole person” analysis.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant continued to use marijuana because of its effects, and he enjoys relaxing and 
socializing with friends while using it.4  
 
Applicant disclosed on his security clearance application and during his subject 
interview that he intended to use marijuana if it is legalized. He and his wife do not drive 
after using marijuana. He does not believe his marijuana use impacted his work 
performance. He provided a statement of intent to refrain from illegal use of marijuana 
and failure to comply would result in automatic revocation of a clearance for as long as 
he was to “hold a clearance and marijuana is a controlled substance.”5 
 
 Applicant has discussed drug use with his oldest child. His children are unaware 
of their parents’ marijuana use. He and his wife agreed they have not been good role 
models regarding their drug use. He stated his wife backs him regarding his intent not to 
use marijuana as long as it is illegal. He and his wife have agreed that they need to 
cease using marijuana. He conceded his use of marijuana as late as April 2013 was 
immature and he exercised poor judgment. He admitted that each time he used 
marijuana he broke the law. Since completing his security clearance application, 
Applicant no longer associates with one of his neighbors with whom he used marijuana. 
Since becoming a candidate for a security clearance he is committed to not using 
marijuana because it is inconsistent with holding a clearance.6  
 
During Applicant’s prior employments he was not subjected to random drug 
testing. He is not aware of his current employer’s drug policy. Applicant provided a 
character letter from his supervisor. He is described as well respected and an elite 
employee who is an expert in his field and has outstanding character and integrity. 
Applicant stated this supervisor is aware of his last drug use in April 2013, but he is not 
aware of Applicant’s prior drug history. He admitted some of his other character 
references were not aware of his prior drug history. His other character references 
indicate he is an honest, trustworthy, hardworking, responsible, professional, and a 
devoted father and husband. Applicant considers himself a good person, capable of 
making a good contribution to the federal government. He is involved in his community.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 Tr. 20, 27-29, 33-36. 
 
5 Tr. 20, 37; AE A.  
 
6 Tr. 49-58. 
 
7 Tr. 37-44, 59-60, 62; AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
5 
 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying conditions for drug involvement 
under AG ¶ 25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1984 to April 2013. He 
expressed his intent not to use marijuana as long as it is illegal and while he holds a 
clearance. I find AG ¶ 25(a) applies and ¶ 25(h) does not.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has used marijuana with varying frequency since 1984. His peak period 
of use was while in college. Although the frequency of use diminished after college he 
continued to use marijuana several times a year and after 2001 he used it one to three 
times every two to three years. Applicant was aware that the use of marijuana is illegal. 
Because illegal drug use is inconsistent with holding a security clearance Applicant 
intends not to use marijuana in the future unless it is legalized. It appears Applicant’s 
motivation for discontinuing his marijuana use is so he can obtain a security clearance. 
He has disassociated with one friend that he used marijuana with in the past.  
 
Applicant used marijuana for 29 years and has abstained from using it for 
fourteen months. His drug abuse is relatively recent and was frequent. It did not happen 
under unique circumstances. Due to his lengthy use, I am not convinced that under the 
circumstances his behavior is unlikely to recur. His past behavior casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26 (a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant stated he no longer associates with one of his neighbors with whom he 
used marijuana. He obviously continues to associate with his wife with whom he used 
 
6 
 
 
marijuana. He stated she agreed they should cease using marijuana, but the evidence 
is insufficient regarding her commitment. He has signed a statement of intent to not use 
marijuana in the future while holding a security clearance and if it is illegal. Based on his 
longevity of use and his short period of abstinence there is an insufficient period of time 
to convince me that he will not use marijuana in the future. AG ¶ 26 (b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He enjoys a good reputation among his supervisors, 
coworkers and friends. He is involved in his community and appears to be a good father 
and husband. Applicant made a conscious decision for the past 29 years to violate the 
law by using the illegal drug marijuana. His last use of marijuana was in April 2013. He 
has expressed his intent to refrain from marijuana use in the future if he was to hold a 
security clearance and it remained illegal. Applicant was beyond the age of youthful 
indiscretion when he continued to use marijuana as an adult, father, and respected 
employee. At this juncture, it is too soon to conclude Applicant is committed to long term 
abstinence and compliance with the law. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
