KEYWORD: Guideline L; Guideline B; Guideline K; Guideline E
DIGEST: Even if the Board considers Applicant’s new evidence for jurisdictional purposes and
reads it in the light most favorable to Applicant, we do not conclude that there was a current
investigation or adjudication of Applicant when the SOR was issued in 2009.  We decline to
conclude that DOHA was precluded from considering past conduct in the current adjudication. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-12742.a1
DATE: 02/25/2011
DATE: February 25, 2011
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-12742
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Daniel C. Schwartz, Esq.
1Applicant testified that she retired from Government service in 1999.  Tr. at 188-189.  See also Government
Exhibit (GE) 1, SCA dated Feb. 25, 2002, at 2.  
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 27, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline L (Outside Activities), Guideline
B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  DOHA amended the SOR on January 12,
2010, raising security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant requested a
hearing.  On September 29, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge erred in his application of the Guideline K mitigating
conditions; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
At the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline L and Guideline B concerns.
Additionally, the Judge made favorable findings under Guideline E.  Therefore, the allegations
presented under those Guidelines are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following
discussion, we affirm the decision of the Judge.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is employed by a Federal
research and development contractor.  Additionally, she owns and operates a consulting firm.  She
previously served as an employee of another Government agency for 30 years.1  In that capacity, she
held a security clearance, which was last adjudicated by the other Government agency in 1995.  In
2003 she submitted a security clearance application (SCA) to the Department of Defense for a
periodic reinvestigation. 
Applicant committed four security infractions while serving in a high-level Government
position in 1998.  Each time she was warned that continued infractions could result in disciplinary
action.  These incidents involved circumstances in which classified materials were not properly
safeguarded.  However, there was no actual or probable compromise of them.  These four infractions
formed the basis of the SOR allegations under Guideline K.  In addition to those alleged in the SOR,
Applicant committed eleven other security infractions from 1985 to 1997.  Almost all of them
occurred in a U.S. facility abroad.  These incidents resulted in warnings, counselings, or briefings
by security officials.  The Judge quoted a security officer who, in regard to a 1990 incident, briefed
Applicant that unless her “habits change more violations will be likely.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant
committed about ten more infractions subsequent to this briefing.  
Applicant’s current duties include access to classified information during meetings and
briefings.  She has not physically handled classified information since retiring from the Government.
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 35(a): “so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently
or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 35(b): “the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities[.]”
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 35(c): “the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.”
3
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge considered three mitigating conditions:
35(a),2 35(b),3 and 35(c).4  Concluding that the first of these was the most pertinent, he
acknowledged that over ten years had elapsed since Applicant’s last security infraction.  He
characterized ten years as “a commonsense measurement of recency and remoteness.”  Decision at
12.  However, he also noted that, since retiring from the Government, Applicant has not had an
opportunity actually to handle classified information, with the result that she has not had an
opportunity to demonstrate that she had corrected her poor habits.  “[W]ithout substantial evidence
of change or reform of Applicant’s security habits, it is reasonable to expect Applicant’s future to
be more like the past, which is a record of repeated security infractions despite repeated cautions to
the contrary.”  Id.  He stated that, under the facts of this case, the mere passage of time in and of
itself was not sufficient to demonstrate changed conduct.
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence, for example
evidence that her infractions occurred under difficult circumstances not likely to recur and evidence
that the other Government agency granted Applicant a clearance despite her infractions.  Also,
Applicant has submitted a letter from an official of her previous agency, which is not contained in
the record.
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 09-01735 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 31, 2010).  A Judge is not required to discuss every piece of
record evidence, a practical impossibility in any event and especially in a record as voluminous as
this.  The Judge discussed record evidence of the high quality of Applicant’s service to the
Government, acknowledging that some of it “was quite powerful.”  Decision at 15.  Applicant’s
submission on appeal provides no reason to conclude that the Judge did not consider her testimony
as to the trying circumstances surrounding many, but not all, of her infractions.
Neither is there any reason to conclude that the Judge failed to consider record evidence of
the prior adjudication by the other Government agency.  Applicant herself casts her argument more
in terms of the weight which the Judge assigned to the evidence rather than an absolute failure to
consider it per se.  Viewing Applicant’s argument in light of the entire record, we find no reason to
conclude that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.
The new evidence which Applicant has submitted consists of a letter which refers to events
in 1999.  We have repeatedly held that jurisdictional defects can be raised at any time including on
appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 13, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-19169
at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 2, 2007).  For that limited purpose only, we have considered Applicant’s new
4
evidence.  Even if we read that statement in a light most favorable to Applicant, we do not conclude
that, when DOHA issued the SOR in 2009, there was any current investigation or adjudication of
Applicant in place by any other agency.  Therefore, the reciprocity provisions of Executive Order
13467 and the National Industrial Security Program Manual cited by Applicant on appeal are not
pertinent on these facts.  We also decline to conclude that DOHA was precluded from considering
past conduct in the context of a current adjudication.  This is the case even where the past conduct
was considered in a prior favorable adjudication.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10859 at 4 (App. Bd.
Sep. 2, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-09163 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Dec 21, 2010).   
We have considered Applicant’s challenge to the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating
conditions, paying special note to her argument that sufficient time has passed so as to justify the
favorable application of 35(a).  However, once it is established that an applicant has committed a
security violation, he or she has a “very heavy burden” in her efforts to demonstrate mitigation.  See
ISCR Case No. 06-21537 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008).  In the case under consideration here, the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant has had no opportunity in the years since her last infraction to
demonstrate rehabilitation is reasonable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08119 at 8 (App. Bd. Jul. 8,
2010) (The years intervening between the applicant’s last known security infraction and the date of
the SOR included an 18 month period in which Applicant did not hold a clearance, thereby vitiating
his argument that the absence of infractions during the intervening years demonstrated
rehabilitation). 
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Order 
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
