 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 (Redacted) )  ADP Case No. 08-06228 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Bell, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline I 
(Psychological Conditions). Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position on February 1, 2008. 
On September 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline I. DOHA acted under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 5, 2010; answered it on October 7, 2010; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
October 8, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 21, 2010, and 
 
2 
 
 
the case was assigned to me on November 3, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on November 9, 2010, scheduling it for December 1, 2010. Applicant retained a lawyer, 
who entered his appearance on November 23, 2010, and requested additional time to 
prepare. I granted his request, and DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing on 
December 1, 2010, rescheduling the hearing for December 16, 2010. I convened the 
hearing as rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 27, 2010. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 At Department Counsel’s request, and without objection from Applicant, I took 
administrative notice of the relevant provisions of the American Psychiatric Association, 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed., 2000) (DSM-IV).1 
Extracts of the relevant provisions of DSM-IV are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old project coordinator employed by a federal contractor. 
She has worked for her current employer since February 2008.  
 
 Applicant had a normal, happy childhood until her preteen years, when she 
started feeling depressed, suffering from migraine headaches, and withdrawing from 
friends and family. She started acting out, associating with the wrong people, 
shoplifting, setting small fires 10-15 times in places like trash cans and construction 
sites, and trying to “look cool and impress other people.” She also spray-painted police 
cars and stole a key to a police gun cabinet. (Tr. 29-30, 49.) At age 14, while working as 
a volunteer in a hospital, she set fire to a mattress in a stairwell, which led to her arrest 
and detention. She was in juvenile detention for arson from June 1999 to March 2001. 
She testified she attempted suicide twice while in detention. (Tr. 65.) She received 
psychiatric and psychological counseling, anger management classes, and group 
therapy while she was in detention. She was diagnosed with depression and treated 
with mood stabilizers and antidepressants. (GX 5 at 1-2.) 
 
 After being released from detention, Applicant was required to continue with 
psychological counseling. She was treated by a psychologist from March 2001 to 
August 2001. Her treatment record reflects 17 visits. It contains progress notes but no 
diagnosis. The last progress notes dated August 28, 2001, note that Applicant “is doing 
much better overall,” and they end with a notation reflecting a follow-up visit in one 
week. (GX 4 at 26.) There were no further visits with this psychologist.  
 
                                                          
1  DSM-IV is cited in one of the psychological evaluations received in evidence (AX A). The relevant 
provisions of DSM-IV are unchanged in the more recent DSM-IV-TR. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s psychologist died in June 2006. In August 2008, her psychologist’s 
spouse, also a psychologist and her deceased husband’s partner at the same 
counseling center, reviewed her husband’s progress notes at DOHA’s request, and she 
concluded that Applicant would have been diagnosed by her husband with pyromania 
and dysthymic disorder. According to DSM-IV, the essential  feature of pyromania is 
“the presence of multiple episodes of deliberate and purposeful fire setting.” The 
essential feature of dysthymic disorder is “a chronically depressed mood that occurs for 
most of the day more days than not for at least 2 years.” The psychologist explained 
that pyromania is a disorder of impulse control, which could impair judgment or 
reliability. She concluded that Applicant’s prognosis would have been “guarded” as of 
her last visit in August 2001, recognizing that a more recent psychological evaluation 
could modify that prognosis. (GX 4 at 6.)  
 
After completing the counseling required by the juvenile court, Applicant decided, 
after consulting with her parents, that she did not need further counseling. She stopped 
taking the medication for depression, because it was causing her to gain weight. (Tr. 35-
36.)  
 
 Applicant returned to high school, took a night course and a correspondence 
course to catch up, and completed high school in June 2002. She began doing 
volunteer work with her church and working part time during the school year. She 
graduated from college cum laude in August 2006 with a bachelor’s degree in political 
science. (Tr. 36-37.) She worked as an intern in a federal government agency from 
January to April 2006. (GX 1 at 7; GX 2 at 5; AX B; Tr. 74.) 
 
 Applicant started working for her current employer as a low-level administrative 
assistant. She was soon promoted to be an executive assistant, and was then promoted 
to be a project coordinator, her current position. (Tr. 39-40.) After Applicant submitted 
her application for a public trust position, a DOHA-selected psychologist evaluated her 
in May 2009. This psychologist made the following clinical findings: 
 
The profile obtained suggests that [Applicant] attempts to present a social 
acceptable appearance particularly to those in positions of authority. She 
is a very outgoing and affable young woman who tends to minimize or 
cloak her psychological issues. I find this troubling given the amount of 
psychotherapy she has in the past. Test findings portray a woman who at 
times can be over-reactive and one who tends to seek out experiences 
that might be considered capricious and immature in nature. I have 
questions regarding her current psychological status. She seems prone to 
seek out a self-indulgent life-style and appears to lack a level of insight 
into her deeper emotional complexities. The data suggest that her affect 
states may not be stable, but rather superficial and charged with rapidly 
changing feelings. Signs of inner turmoil or weakness are almost 
customarily denied or downplay[ed]. Unfortunately based on the findings I 
would have reservations putting [Applicant] in a delicate position of trust. I 
 
4 
 
 
would recommend that she revisit the idea of starting therapy to complete 
the work she had begun while learning to face her difficulties head on. 
 
The psychologist diagnosed Applicant with histrionic personality disorder2 with 
narcissistic personality features3. (GX 5 at 2.) Applicant testified that she spent a total of 
about one hour with this psychologist, most of the time while taking a test on a 
computer. She talked with the psychologist 15 to 30 minutes. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 In November 2010, Applicant sought a second opinion from another psychologist 
regarding the May 2009 diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder with narcissistic 
personality features. This psychologist recited the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria and 
concluded that Applicant showed a total absence of histrionic features and no 
symptoms of narcissism. She described Applicant as “a normal, well-adjusted young 
adult who demonstrates none of the character traits that might make her a security risk.” 
(AX A at 1-2.) The psychologist did not recite the factual basis for her conclusion that 
none of the diagnostic criteria were met. Applicant testified that this psychologist also 
administered a test, which Applicant completed at home, followed by two face-to-face 
consultations, each lasting 60 to 90 minutes. (Tr. 45-46.) There is no indication that this 
psychologist considered the 2001 treatment notes or the August 2008 assessment 
based on those notes. 
 
 In December 2010, Applicant obtained another evaluation from a psychiatrist 
experienced with evaluating applicants for security clearances and assignment to 
sensitive positions. He reviewed the 2001 treatment notes and the August 2008 
                                                          
2 The DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder are: a pervasive pattern 
of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of 
contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following: (1) is uncomfortable in situations in which he or 
she is not the center of attention; (2) interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate 
sexually seductive or provocative behavior; (3) displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of 
emotions; (4) consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self; (5) has a style of speech 
that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail; (6) shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and 
exaggerated expression of emotion; (7) is suggestible, i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances; 
(8) considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are. 
 
3 The DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for narcissistic personality disorder are: a pervasive pattern of 
grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack of empathy, beginning by early 
adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following: (1) has a 
grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g. exaggerates achievements and talents, expects to be 
recognized as superior without commensurate achievements); (2) is preoccupied with fantasies of 
unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love; (3) believes that he or she is ”special” and 
unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or 
institutions); (4) requires excessive admiration; (5) has a sense of entitlement, i.e., unreasonable 
expectations of especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations; (6) is 
interpersonally exploitative, i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own ends; (7) lacks 
empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others; (8) is often envious of 
others or believes that others are envious of him or her; (9) shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or 
attitudes. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
assessment based on those notes, but there is no indication that he considered the May 
2009 assessment. His conclusions were: 
 
It is my professional opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that 
[Applicant] is a mature, honest, and serious employee, who is 
dedicated to her job and her country, and who can be counted upon 
to think and act rationally and responsibly in case of a crisis. She is 
not suffering from a personality disorder that would affect her ability 
to safeguard classified information. So much time has elapsed 
since the criminal behavior of her adolescence that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, or 
sound judgment. There is strong evidence of successful 
rehabilitation from the unlawful and self-punitive behaviors of her 
early adolescence.  
 
AX B at 3. Applicant testified that she had two meetings with the psychiatrist, each 
lasting about one hour. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisal for February 2008-February 2009 rated her as 
exceeding expectations in six elements of technical knowledge and meeting 
expectations in two elements. It rated her as exceeding expectations in  seven elements 
of professional skills and meeting expectations in two elements. (AX D at 4-5.) Her most 
recent appraisal for the period ending in February 2010 rated her as exceeding 
expectations in all elements of technical knowledge and exceeding expectations in all 
elements of work management except one, for which she was rated as meeting 
expectations. (AX D at 6-7.) She has received several accolades for her performance, 
commenting on her dependability, attention to detail, enthusiasm, analytical skills, and 
leadership. One of her supervisors described her as one of their superstars. (AX D at 1-
3.) 
 
 Applicant’s current first-line supervisor testified that Applicant has continued her 
exemplary performance and has become her supervisor’s “right hand person.” (Tr. 94.) 
The supervisor testified that Applicant is extremely reliable and dependable. She does 
not act impulsively and has no problems with persons in authority. (Tr. 102-03.) 
Applicant’s counsel read aloud each of the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for histrionic 
personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder, and asked her supervisor if 
Applicant exhibited any of them. Her supervisor answered in the negative for each of 
the criteria, admitting on cross-examination that she was not a qualified medical 
professional (Tr. 97-100, 104.)  
 
 Three of Applicant’s friends describe her as dependable, efficient, competent, 
and “a reliable, natural born leader who is never afraid to take on responsibility and 
holds her integrity at the forefront of all her actions.” (AX E at 1-2, 4.) Applicant’s aunt 
and uncle, who are aware of her problems during adolescence, describe her as hard 
working, self-reliant, and compassionate. (AX E at 5.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother testified that Applicant had a normal childhood, was a good 
student, and actively involved in childhood activities. When Applicant was in junior high 
school, she became withdrawn and uninterested in outside activities. After Applicant 
completed her detention and the six months of counseling required by the juvenile court, 
she and her parents discussed whether she could continue to receive counseling. Her 
parents had noticed that she had changed and was again involved in outside activities. 
They decided to stop the counseling, with the understanding that it could be resumed if 
Applicant showed any signs of regression. When Applicant returned to high school, she 
continued to be a good student and was inducted into the National Honor Society. She 
was awarded a college scholarship and worked part time in college to help support 
herself. She was on the fencing team in college and she continues to maintain a high 
level of physical fitness. She has an excellent relationship with her mother and her 
siblings. (Tr. 113-24.) 
 
 Applicant is a member of a local fencing team, a community emergency 
response team, a local volunteer fire department, and a local volunteer fire and rescue 
squad. (AX C at 2, AX F; Tr. 40.) Her fire chief describes her as “a hard worker who 
consistently displays integrity, enthusiasm, commitment and responsibility.” (AX E at 3.) 
The volunteer coordinator for the community emergency response team describes her 
as “extremely committed, dependable, thorough, interested in helping the community 
and in doing the right things right.” (AX E at 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that “the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of 
Defense contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant 
or him or her eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant received mental health treatment from June 1999 to 
March 2001 while incarcerated for arson (¶ 1.a); and that she received mental health 
treatment from March 2001 to August 2001, was diagnosed with dysthymic disorder and 
pyromania (¶ 1.b), and received a “guarded” prognosis (¶ 1.c). It also alleges that in 
May 2009 she was diagnosed with histrionic personality disorder with narcissistic 
personality features, with a recommendation that she return to therapy (¶ 1.d). Finally, it 
alleges that as of December 2009, Applicant was not undergoing any mental health 
therapy or treatment and not taking any medications (¶ 1.e). 
 
 The trustworthiness concern relating to Guideline I is set out in AG ¶ 27:  
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
AG ¶ 28 sets out the three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; 
 
8 
 
 
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and  
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
 Applicant’s detention for arson, the diagnosis of pyromania based on her 
psychological counseling in 2001, and the diagnosis of histrionic personality disorder 
and narcissistic personality disorder by a DOHA-selected psychologist are sufficient to 
establish AG ¶ 28(a) and (b). The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 28(c) is not 
established by the notation on the psychologist’s progress notes about a follow-up in 
one week, because the record does not reflect whether the notation was a treatment 
recommendation or a mere expectation that Applicant would return for further 
counseling. However, Applicant’s decision, in consultation with her parents, to stop 
taking her medication for depression establishes AG ¶ 28(c).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the identified 
condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated 
ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan.” AG ¶ 29(a). The first prong 
of this mitigating condition is established, because the psychologist’s evaluation in 2001 
indicated that Applicant was responding to treatment. However, the second prong is not 
established because Applicant has no ongoing treatment plan. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual has voluntarily entered 
a counseling or treatment program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the 
individual is currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified mental health professional.” AG ¶ 29(b). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s initial counseling was involuntary, she has never 
voluntarily sought or received counseling, and she is not currently receiving counseling 
or treatment. 
Security concerns may be mitigated by a “recent opinion by a duly qualified 
mental health professional employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. 
Government that an individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and 
has a low probability of recurrence or exacerbation.” AG ¶ 29(c). This mitigating 
condition is not established because the one qualified mental health professional 
engaged by the U.S. Government expressed doubt that her previous condition is under 
control and expressed reservations about placing Applicant in a position of trust. 
Security concerns may be mitigated if “the past emotional instability was a 
temporary condition (e.g., one caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the 
situation has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional 
instability. AG ¶ 29(d). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
psychological problems were not a temporary condition and it is not clear whether her 
previous problems have been resolved. 
Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “there is no indication of a current 
problem.” AG ¶ 29(e). The evidence is conflicting on this point. A psychologist, a 
psychiatrist, and Applicant’s supervisors describe her as fully rehabilitated and an 
exemplary employee. On the other hand, the 2001 diagnosis found severe disorders 
and gave a “guarded” prognosis. The DOHA-selected psychologist described Applicant 
as a person who minimizes or cloaks her psychological issues, lacks insight into her 
emotional complexities, and denies or downplays her inner turmoil or weakness. None 
of the medical professionals except the DOHA-selected psychologist appear to have 
considered Applicant’s entire medical record. The psychological and psychiatric 
assessments from May 2009, November 2010, and December 2010 are conclusory and 
lacking in detail. None of the medical professionals who provided evidence testified in 
person, making it impossible to ask them which diagnostic criteria, if any, they found 
applicable to Applicant and what they relied on to conclude that each of the criteria was 
or was not applicable. Applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
she has not met her burden of establishing AG ¶ 29(e). 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is an intelligent, articulate, intensely driven young adult. She has been 
very successful in her current job. Her employers believe she has overcome her past. 
While it is possible that she has overcome her psychological problems without 
professional help since 2001, some of the psychological evidence, albeit untested by 
 
10 
 
 
cross-examination, suggests that she may be simply masking her psychological issues. 
The psychological evidence that she has overcome her earlier psychological problems 
is conclusory and untested by cross-examination. The inconclusive state of the 
evidence requires me to resolve the doubt in favor of national security.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline I, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on psychological conditions. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to sensitive 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I (Psychological Conditions): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security to grant 
Applicant eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position. Eligibility for access to 
sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
