                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11762 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant violated security protocols. Although his violation of security rules was 
designed to facilitate mission accomplishment, his violations of information technology 
system security protocols are not mitigated at this time. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86) 
(GE 1). On July 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline M (use of information 
technology systems). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On August 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
received Applicant’s response to the SOR allegations. (HE 3) Applicant requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On November 1, 2010, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to 
proceed on Applicant’s case. On November 8, 2010, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case 
to me. On November 18, 2010, DOHA issued a hearing notice. (HE 1) Applicant waived 
his right to 15 days notice of his hearing. (Tr. 13-14) On November 22, 2010, Applicant’s 
hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GE 1-5) (Tr. 
20). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-5. (Tr. 21) Additionally, I admitted 
the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR as hearing exhibits. (HE 
1-3) On December 1, 2010, I received the transcript. I held the record open until 
January 28, 2011, to permit Applicant to submit documentation. (Tr. 64-66, 108) On 
January 28, 2011, I received four additional documents from Applicant. (AE A-D) 
Department Counsel noted that a letter from Mr. B was hearsay and urged that it 
receive less weight. (AE A) Applicant’s proffered exhibits are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he denied all of the SOR allegations. (HE 3) 
However, with respect to SOR ¶ 1.f, he said he received some training. (HE 3) His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 5)2 He received 
a master of science degree in electrical engineering in February 1982. (Tr. 5-6) He 
married in 1980 and divorced in 1985. His children were born in 1980 and 1981. His 
second marriage was in 1989, and he was divorced in 1998. Applicant has never served 
in the military. He did not disclose any illegal drug use or alcohol-related offenses on his 
July 23, 2007, SF 86.  
 
Use of information technology systems 
 
Applicant is a network professional with almost 30 years of experience. (Tr. 17, 
48) Each of the incidents alleged in the SOR occurred. (Tr. 17)  Applicant began 
working as a senior systems integration analyst for a major government contractor in 
April 2005. (GE 1) Applicant was responsible for installation, configuration, and 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s July 23, 
2007 SF 86 and his resume. (GE 1, 5)  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
maintenance of a multi-million dollar network monitoring system (NMS). (GE 4) 
Applicant periodically downloaded software from his employer’s site. (Tr. 43-44; GE 4) 
He said his downloads of patches were authorized by his manager. (GE 4) Applicant’s 
manager, Mr. B, provided the following statement after the hearing: 
 
[Applicant’s] job responsibilities included managing the [NMS]. This 
system required periodic maintenance that required downloading and 
installing software patches from the [NMS] company site. It also required 
other maintenance including, but not limited to providing “view only” 
controlled access to their [NMS] appliances via Webex, as well as other 
needed [NMS], as well as other needed [NMS] related activities. 
[Company] security was asked several times for the permission to conduct 
most of these activities and, in every case, permission (sometimes just 
verbal) was granted. (AE A) 
 
The NMS downloads triggered intrusion detection systems. (GE 4) Applicant 
explained that security protocols often permit actions to occur which are forbidden even 
though the security protocols could stop the actions from occurring. It is like prohibiting 
entry through a door and then keeping “‘the door open but we will shoot everybody who 
goes through that door.’ That’s the policy for lack of a better explanation.” (Tr. 50)   
 
On February 10, 2006, Applicant’s employer issued a report of investigation 
(ROI) which cited him for several violations of information security rules. (GE 2) 
Applicant’s SOR listed six allegations, which are all discussed in the ROI and at his 
hearing.  
 
Applicant was working for about two weeks at the government worksite when he 
removed a laptop computer from a secure network, and allegedly connected the laptop 
computer to another government agency’s network, and then connected the laptop 
computer back into the secure network. (Tr. 51-52; GE 2 at 1-2; SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant 
said the laptop was not actually connected to other government agency’s network. (Tr. 
109) He used a data capture from the other government agency, and then used the 
laptop to evaluate the data capture. (Tr. 109)3 The contractor purchased the laptop 
computer with special software valued at about $150,000 for use on a government 
computer network. (Tr. 28, 51) The laptop computer was not equipped with antivirus 
software or fully patched with updates. (GE 2 at 1-2; HE 2) Applicant was unaware that 
the laptop did not have adequate anti-virus software. (Tr. 39-40) Moving this laptop 
computer from a trusted network to an untrusted network, and then back to the trusted 
network, can compromise the trusted network because vulnerabilities are possibly 
transferred to the DoD’s trusted network. (Tr. 28-29; GE 2 at 1-2; HE 2) A vulnerable 
computer or network is easier for a hacker to compromise. (Tr. 30) Applicant’s 
supervisor asked him to use the laptop computer to troubleshoot the other network, and 
Applicant complied with the request. (Tr. 51-52) After he completed the mission, he was 
 
3 Evaluation of a “data capture” avoids the necessity for a connection to an untrusted network 
because the data is evaluated separately from the network.   
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
complimented at a meeting for his successful endeavor. (Tr. 52) Because Applicant 
prudently used a “data capture” the DoD network was not compromised. 
  
Applicant connected an encrypted tunnel to his home computer, which violated 
security controls and potentially created a tunnel to a private or commercial network. 
(GE 2 at 2; SOR ¶ 1.b) Theoretically, a tunnel to a home computer might have permitted 
a hacker or other person with malicious intent to use Applicant’s home computer to 
bypass the DoD network’s security systems. (Tr. 30-32) However, Applicant, as a 
computer expert, knew that his home network had superb anti-virus protection, and thus 
there was no danger posed to the DoD system by Applicant’s violation of the rules. (Tr. 
53) Applicant connected the DoD network to his home computer because he wanted to 
better accomplish the DoD mission, using some software resources on his home 
computer. (Tr. 52-53)  
 
Applicant downloaded unauthorized streaming media software to his government 
computer. (Tr. 53-55; GE 2 at 2; SOR ¶ 1.c) Upon inspection, additional unauthorized 
software was found on his government computer. Id. Downloading non-approved 
software is a violation of Army regulations and creates a risk that a virus or other 
malicious logic will enter a government computer system through the software. (Tr. 32-
33; GE 2 at 2; SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant was responsible for a major application that was a 
new system, and he had to constantly download patches to about 20 servers to protect 
the integrity and functioning of the application. (Tr. 54-55) The first time he applied a 
patch from the website of the owners of the major application, the IDS detected the 
download and Applicant talked to security. (Tr. 55, 93) This was the only occasion he 
advised security of downloading a patch. (Tr. 93) Applicant told his manager that the 
only way to keep the system running was to download and install the patches and his 
manager told Applicant to go ahead and do it. (Tr. 55; AE A) He believed his manager 
talked to security a couple times about it, and his manager was not reprimanded later 
for absence of security’s advance permission to download the patches. (Tr. 56; AE A) In 
addition, at the direction of another government contractor, Applicant connected the 
server to a bulletin board type system without pre-authorization from security. (Tr. 56, 
72-73, 93; GE 2 at 2) The bulletin board was for customer service and allowed 
customers to efficiently report problems, and it allowed Applicant’s company to 
document resolution of those problems. (Tr. 57) Applicant’s goal was not to violate 
security. His goal was to improve efficiency and customer service. (Tr. 76) Applicant 
said everyone was aware of the bulletin board system’s use. (Tr. 57)       
 
On February 3, 2006, Applicant used a WebEx4 through a secure DoD server to 
contact a vendor-contractor.5 His use of the server circumvented security controls. (Tr. 
45; GE 2 at 2; SOR ¶ 1.d) His objective was not to circumvent security. (Tr. 58-59) The 
 
4 A WebEx is an application sharing and conferencing service that allows those who are in 
conference together to see manipulations on their computer screens. In this case, those persons in 
conference could see information and applications on the DoD server.   
 
5 SOR ¶ 1.d (the transcript erroneously states SOR ¶ 1.e) was amended with the consent of the 
parties to conform with the allegation as stated in the February 10, 2006 ROI. (Tr. 96-97)  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
intrusion detection system would not detect the intrusion because the use of a WebEx 
appears to be normal traffic. (Tr. 83-84) His goal was to correct a technical problem with 
a server. (Tr. 59) Applicant used a WebEx conference with a third party without prior 
approval from security. (Tr. 34-37, 45-46; GE 2 at 1) The third party,6 the vendor that 
licensed some very expensive software to DoD (software valued at several hundred 
thousand dollars), was located on the West Coast and the system with a problem was 
on the East Coast. Applicant did not want the delay and expense of having experts 
travel from the vendor’s location to the East Coast to work on the server. Applicant 
permitted the vendor to have remote access to the DoD server over the Internet to 
check the server. (Tr. 58) Of the five security violations alleged in the SOR, the use of 
the WebEx conference device to probe a DoD secure server was the most serious 
because “an uncleared person” from a vendor-corporation “is coming in and looking 
inside a government computer” without the permission or knowledge of security 
personnel. (Tr. 83, 86) Applicant was able to observe the actions of the vendor, and he 
believed he would be able to prevent, and did prevent the vendor from abuse of the 
DoD server. (Tr. 58, 85) Applicant said his corporate supervisors authorized him to use 
the WebEx, and one supervisor actually participated in the WebEx with Applicant and 
the third-party vendor. (Tr. 90; AE A) Nevertheless, even if Applicant had explained his 
plan to conduct the WebEx and allow the vendor to troubleshoot the problem under his 
direct observation, security would have disapproved this proposal. (Tr. 86-87) Applicant 
disclosed the use of WebEx to security after the fact. (GE 2) However, this breach of 
security rules occurred after Applicant received information assurance awareness 
training. Id.   
 
Applicant used a contractor-owned laptop and software that was purchased to 
work on a DoD contract for a contract with another federal government agency. (Tr. 40, 
62; SOR ¶ 1.e) Applicant was the only source of this information. (Tr. 40) Applicant said 
his supervisors at the government contractor asked him to use the laptop and software 
to assist the other federal government agency. (Tr. 41-42, 63) Applicant said he was 
permitted to use the software on multiple contracts for multiple agencies, and a 
government witness said the use of the laptop and software was restricted to DoD 
contracts. (Tr. 80, 91) It is possible that the use of the software was restricted to a 
particular laptop, and not to a particular government agency. (Tr. 81) The licensing 
contract was not provided, and Applicant likely had more direct knowledge of licensing 
restrictions than other witnesses. (Tr. 91) I conclude the allegation that Applicant 
violated the license for the laptop and its software is not substantiated. Nevertheless, as 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.a, supra, if there was a connection of the laptop and software to 
another government agency network, the connection would risk the compromise of the 
DoD network, when it was connected back into the DoD network because vulnerabilities 
in the other government agency network could have been transferred to the DoD 
network. (Tr. 81-82) Applicant conceded that from a security standpoint “it was probably 
not a wise decision;” however, he was under direct orders to assist the other 
government agency. (Tr. 63)  
 
6 Applicant subsequently received employment from the vendor, and then his employer in 2005 
purchased the vendor’s company. (Tr. 59-60) 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
After each security-related information technology incident, Applicant received 
oral warnings and subsequently he received information-awareness training. (Tr. 66; 
SOR ¶ 1.f) He said he told security the first time he downloaded software, and the 
response was to go ahead. (Tr. 67) The security person providing approval would then 
contact the intrusion detection team and let them know that the intrusion or download 
was approved. (Tr. 78) Applicant was involved in various intrusions, which set off 
alarms, and resulted in investigations being initiated or opened. (Tr. 79)  
 
There is flexibility in security and information assurance. The network has a 
designated approval authority (DAA) who is supposed to make decisions, where 
security processes and procedures can be violated or waived in order to accomplish the 
mission or improve efficiency. (Tr. 74, 77)  
 
When Applicant left his employment with the contractor, he received an award. 
His departure was under positive terms. (Tr. 18, 59, 70; AE B) 
 
Applicant contended that he knew exactly what he was doing at all times, and the 
DoD information technology system was never at risk. (Tr. 109) He insisted he would 
have shown poor judgment, if he had challenged the orders of his bosses. (Tr. 110) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline M (use of information technology systems).  
 
Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
  AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern relating to use of information technology 
systems problems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶ 40 lists eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations; 
 
(g) negligence or lax security habits in handling information technology 
that persist despite counseling by management; and 
 
(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, 
that results in damage to the national security. 
 
AG ¶¶ 40(a) and 40(b) do not apply because Applicant did not engage in any 
“illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or component 
thereof,” or any “illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information technology 
system.” AG ¶¶ 40(c) and 40(d) do not apply because he did not use “any information 
technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to a 
compartmented area within the same system,” and he did not download, store, or 
transmit any “classified information on or to any unauthorized software, hardware, or 
information technology system.” AG ¶ 40(h) does not apply because there is no 
evidence of any “damage to the national security.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 40(e), 40(f), and 40(g) apply because security personnel did not authorize 
Applicant’s use of WebEx software through a secure DoD server to contact a vendor-
contractor, and his use of WebEx is prohibited by “rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations.” (SOR ¶ 1.d)7 Applicant received counseling about security procedures in 
 
7 Applicant’s use of WebEx, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, is the only unmitigated security violation. He 
either refuted the other SOR allegations or demonstrated that he acted in good faith, being fully 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
handling information technology after he violated procedures. He subsequently used 
WebEx without permission, which was a breach of security protocols. Further inquiry 
about potential applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
 
Three conditions under AG ¶ 41 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
  
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions. 
On February 3, 2006, Applicant used a WebEx through a secure DoD server to contact 
a vendor-contractor. The vendor-contractor located on the West Coast, using WebEx 
entered a DoD server on the East Coast and moved about within the DoD server, 
attempting to troubleshoot a problem. Security or another authorized entity did not 
monitor the movement within the DoD server. The vendor-contractor did not receive any 
vetting or clearance from security. This was a significant breach of security that 
occurred after Applicant was counseled on several occasions about security 
requirements. Applicant is exceptionally knowledgeable about information technology. 
He has an outstanding understanding of the risks involved. Although there is no proof 
that Applicant’s conduct caused any damage to national security, if other contractors 
were allowed on their own authority to clearly breach important security requirements, 
anarchy would result. Damage to national security would be inevitable because others 
who lack Applicant’s experience and skill would not properly monitor the breach of 
security, or would take risks, assuming they had the requisite skill and knowledge to 
prevent damage to the information technology systems.  
 
At Applicant’s hearing, he emphasized his good-faith desire to accomplish his 
mission and his company’s requirements; however, he acknowledged the vendor-
contractor, who breached security protocols, could have traveled to the DoD server, as 
opposed to using the WebEx. Additionally, Applicant could have sought security 
approval or a waiver from the designated approval authority, and he did not do so. 
Because Applicant was unwilling to fully accept the DoD security requirements as 
 
knowledgeable that his actions would not cause actual harm to security. His violations of security rules 
were based on the belief that they would facilitate mission accomplishment, and it is noteworthy that in 
2005-2006, when the violations occurred, he had very limited experience working with DoD security.     
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
trumping his or his company’s perception of mission requirements, I am not convinced 
that the breach of security occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
There is some residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to complying 
with security requirements when those requirements result in inefficiency or 
compromise timely mission accomplishment. His presentation of mitigation evidence is 
insufficient to fully mitigate use of information technology systems security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 51 years old, and he is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with security requirements. He received a master of science 
degree in electrical engineering. Applicant is a network professional with almost 30 
years of experience. In 2005-2006, as a senior systems integration analyst for a major 
government contractor, Applicant was responsible for installation, configuration, and 
maintenance of a multi-million dollar network monitoring system. He worked diligently 
on this project, and his employer praised him for his hard work and superb results. His 
most recent security violation was in February 2006, which is not recent. He deserves 
substantial credit for volunteering to support the U.S. Government, as an employee of a 
contractor. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his 
employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. I give 
Applicant substantial credit for admitting most of the underlying facts relating to the 
breaches of security, as alleged in the SOR. These factors show some responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant violated security rules relating to information 
technology. He was counseled about compliance with security rules. For example, 
security rules were violated when patches were installed without advance permission 
from security. Applicant observed that when permission to install patches was sought, it 
was always granted, and when patches were downloaded without security’s permission, 
no adverse action beyond oral discussions with security personnel resulted. Applicant 
interpreted this as a green light to install patches without security permission. He was 
exceptionally knowledgeable about information technology issues, and he had a 
tendency to believe his expertise allowed him to violate security rules, which are 
primarily designed to protect information technology systems from software downloads 
and other information technology-related actions by those without his expertise. He was 
aware of the security requirement to seek permission before using software such as 
WebEx on a secure server. Nevertheless, he allowed a vendor-contractor to enter the 
DoD server through a secure DoD server using WebEx, which is a major violation of 
DoD security protocols. This breach of security was unnecessary because Applicant 
could have taken other actions to meet mission requirements. He should have sought 
permission from security or the designated approval authority for that system to 
undertake the WebEx, and explained the option of bringing an expert from the West 
Coast to the server location on the East Coast to make on-site repairs. Ultimately, it was 
not Applicant or his company’s decision whether security protocols should be violated or 
waived for reasons of mission accomplishment. Moreover, Applicant’s reliance on his 
project manager’s statement is misplaced. His project manager does not have the 
authority to authorize Applicant to violate security rules and protocols. I am not 
convinced Applicant would comply with DoD security protocols or seek a waiver, if he 
viewed those DoD security protocols as frustrating his efforts to accomplish his 
company’s mission.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude use of information 
technology systems security concerns are not fully mitigated, and he is not eligible for 
access to classified information at this time.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
