KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board does not have the authority to make factual findings.  Applicant’s
assertions raise a possibility that procedural due process may have been impaired in this case. 
Adverse decision remanded. 
CASENO: 08-11526.a1
DATE: 02/15/2011
DATE: February 15, 2011
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11526
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 15, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On April 30, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Rita C. O’Brien
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the record should be reopened to
allow Applicant to submit matters that were not available for the Judge’s consideration at the time
she reviewed the evidence and rendered her decision in the case.  For the following reasons, the
Board remands the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
As a preliminary matter, Department Counsel correctly points out that the Board will
consider statements (and where appropriate, other matters) not in the record for the limited purpose
of deciding whether a party was wrongfully denied procedural due process, in this case the right to
have evidence entered into the record for the Judge to consider.  Lacking any other guidance in the
matter, the Board will consider the representations of the parties concerning pertinent procedural
aspects of this case.
Concerning the procedural issue of whether there is good cause to set aside the Judge’s
decision and to reopen the record to allow Applicant to submit additional materials for the Judge’s
consideration, the record indicates that at the April 8, 2010 hearing, the Judge granted Applicant a
period of time post-hearing during which he could augment the record with additional documents.
That time period expired on April 22, 2010.  Applicant was instructed to forward any documents to
Department Counsel by that time.  Applicant makes the following representations on appeal:
Applicant represented himself below.  On April 14, 2010, he attempted to fax the documentation to
the number that he was given.  Several attempts to transmit the fax resulted in failure.  He then made
attempts to contact Department Counsel and an administrative assistant at DOHA in an attempt to
get the correct number for the fax.  Applicant indicates that he left several messages with the
administrative assistant and eventually got her on the phone.  He states that the assistant indicated
she would inform Department Counsel and the Judge and would let him know what additional steps
he should take.  Applicant asserts that he never heard back from the administrative assistant.  The
time period granted for extension expired, and the Judge rendered her decision.
Department Counsel opposes Applicant’s appeal.  He asserts that Applicant was provided
with his fax number.  He asserts that there is a presumption of good faith and regularity in
administrative proceedings, and that, in this particular case, there is a rebuttable presumption that
had Applicant spoken to anyone at DOHA, they would have contacted Department Counsel or the
Judge.  Department Counsel argues further that Applicant was ultimately responsible for ensuring
that any documents he desired to have considered were submitted in a timely manner.  Therefore,
one would reasonably expect that Applicant would have made other efforts to ensure his documents
were submitted.  In particular, Department Counsel asserts that Applicant failed directly to contact
Department Counsel using the telephone number he had been provided.
3
The Board does not have the authority to make factual findings.  Nor can we determine from
the record before us that Applicant’s appeal is without merit.  Compare, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
22217 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 2008) (“The record as it now stands is inconsistent with Applicant’s
contention on appeal that she detrimentally relied on poor advice from Department Counsel in
presenting her case”).  See ISCR Case No. 05-03941 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007).  In similar
situations, the Board has remanded the case to the Judge to address the matter raised on appeal.  See
ISCR Case No. 04-07825 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 18, 2006) (Applicant’s response to the FORM not
included in the record); ISCR Case No. 06-19169 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 2, 2007) (Jurisdictional
defect); ISCR Case No. 01-20562 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003) (Record ambiguous as to whether
Applicant was provided an opportunity to respond to a document considered by the Judge).
Accordingly, we conclude that the best resolution of the issue raised in this case is to remand it to
the Judge.  She should reopen the record and give the parties an opportunity to address the issue
raised on appeal, bearing in mind that federal agencies are entitled to a presumption of good faith
and regularity in the performance of their responsibilities.  See ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jun. 25, 2009); see also ISCR case No. 01-22311 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2003) (A party seeking
to rebut the presumption of good faith has a heavy burden).  Thereafter, she should conduct further
appropriate processing of the case, consistent with the Directive.    
Order
Pursuant to Item E3.1.33.2 of the Directive’s Additional Procedural Guidance, the Board
remands the case to the Judge for further processing consistent with this decision.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
