 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07792    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On October 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 3, 2010, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on December 17, 2010. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 6, 2011. She answered the 
 
2 
 
FORM in an undated response. She did not object to the admission of the items 
attached to the FORM, and they are admitted. Department Counsel did not object to the 
documents in Applicant’s response, and they are admitted as Exhibits (AE) A through C. 
The case was assigned to me on February 24, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since June 2009. She is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. She is a high school graduate. She was married from 1990 until her divorce in 
1993. She has two children who live with their father. Applicant has custody of the 
children during their summer holidays.1  
 
 Applicant has experienced financial problems for a number of years. She filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1998. She made all the required payments to the trustee, and 
her debts were discharged in 2003.2   
 
 Applicant and her ex-boyfriend were together for 13 years and lived on both their 
incomes. He managed the finances, but most of the accounts were in her name. In 
about September 2006, she discovered that he had not been paying their bills. He used 
the money to get his own residence and moved out. She was unable to pay their 
accumulated debt and maintain her bills on her salary alone. She filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in November 2006. The bankruptcy was dismissed in July 2007.3  
 
 Applicant stated that her bankruptcy was dismissed because she was unable to 
maintain the payments after she was laid off from her job in February 2007. Her 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) indicates continuous employment 
with the same company from 2000 to March 2009, when she permanently lost her job 
after the company relocated to another state. The SF 86 shows that Applicant was 
unemployed until she was hired by her current employer in June 2009.4 
 
 The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts with balances totaling about $25,000, 
past-due first and second mortgages, and Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was 
filed in 2006 and dismissed in July 2007. Applicant admitted the bankruptcy allegation 
and that she owed the seven delinquent debts and the second mortgage. She denied 
owing the first mortgage. Applicant’s house was lost to foreclosure, and the first 
mortgage was satisfied when the house was sold.5 
 
                                                          
1 Item 5; Applicant’s response to FORM.  
 
2 Item 9.  
 
3 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
4 Items 4, 5. 
5 Items 4, 9; AE C. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant saw a bankruptcy attorney in January 2010 to discuss filing Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. When she responded to DOHA interrogatories in January 2010, she wrote 
that she was filing Chapter 13 bankruptcy and she should have her debts paid off in five 
years. In November 2010, Applicant retained the bankruptcy attorney that she saw in 
January 2010 to file a Chapter 13 bankruptcy on her behalf. She paid $540, which 
included $340 for expenses and filing fees and $200 as a deposit toward the attorney’s 
fees of $3,200. Applicant stated that all the debts in the SOR, including the $23,000 
balance due on her second mortgage, will be included in the bankruptcy plan.6   
 
 It is unclear if the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition has been filed. Applicant stated 
that after her ex-boyfriend left, she had to start over with nothing. She stated that she 
learned to live on her income alone. She stated that she has kept up with her bills for 
the last two-plus years and that she “work[s] very hard and [she has] learned that you 
live within your means.”7 
 
 Applicant submitted several character letters from managers and supervisors 
who praised her job performance, work ethic, trustworthiness, honor, responsibility, 
honesty, loyalty, and integrity.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
6 Item 6. 
7 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
8 AE A, B. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
 
5 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and her ex-boyfriend were together for 13 years. He handled the 
finances, but most of the accounts were in her name. He did not pay the bills before 
they separated. She was unable to pay their accumulated debts and her living expenses 
on her salary alone. She filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2006. The 
bankruptcy was dismissed in July 2007. She stated that she was laid off from her job 
and was unable to maintain the payments under her bankruptcy plan. Applicant’s SF 86 
indicates that Applicant was continuously employed with the same company from 2000 
to March 2009, when she permanently lost her job after the company relocated to 
another state. It is possible that Applicant was laid off on a temporary basis in 2007, and 
she did not report the temporary lay off on the SF 86. Her ex-boyfriend’s actions, their 
separation, and her unemployment qualify as conditions that were outside her control. 
AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant’s first mortgage was satisfied when the house was sold after foreclosure. That 
debt has been resolved. There is no evidence of any payments on any of the other 
debts. Applicant consulted with a bankruptcy attorney in January 2010, but she did not 
retain and pay him $540 until November 2010. The current status of the bankruptcy is 
unclear. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant acted 
responsibly and made a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve her delinquent 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they 
are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the first mortgage 
 
6 
 
that was paid when the house sold after foreclosure. In sum, I find that financial 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
character evidence. However, the limited information in the record has not convinced 
me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
