                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case: 09-04601 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Greg C. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On February 26 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). On August 3, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 14, 2010, and requested that the 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On November 9, 2010, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 15 Items 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on November 17, 2010. Applicant received the 
FORM on November 22, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. She did not submit any additional documentation. On 
January 11, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has three 
children. Applicant is married to her third husband. She and her first husband were 
married and divorced twice. (Items 5 and 15) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports from March, August, and October 2009, and 
February 2010, the SOR alleged 54 debts totaling $49,037. Applicant admitted that she 
owed the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1, except the debts listed in Paragraphs 1.c, 1.aa, 1.bb, 
1.ff, and 1.jj to 1.mm. 1 Those debts total $6,708. Applicant’s debts began accruing in 
2005. Applicant’s debts consist of medical bills, credit cards, a repossessed car balance 
owed, a utility expense, and miscellaneous creditors. Seventeen of the medical debts 
may be included in the $50 and $100 monthly garnishment payments she is making 
after the debts were reduced to judgments, but she did not identify those SOR debts in 
her payment schedules. They may be the debts in Subparagraphs 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.aa 
to 1.qq, totaling $12,822. She provided bank automatic deduction statements to 
corroborate her assertions. These documents showed Applicant paid a total of $2,800 
from March 2009 to August 2010 when she submitted her SOR Answer to DOHA. She 
did not provide any evidence to contradict the information contained in the CBRs. 
Applicant included in her Answer and the interrogatory responses copies of letters from 
August 2009 she wrote to creditors, making handwritten notations on them later that she 
had no response from some and would pay others later because she could not afford 
payments now. Applicant’s SOR shows 39 debts that are under $500 each. Those 
debts total $8,429. She told the government investigator in May 2009 that she could not 
afford to pay more than $200 monthly on her debts. She is paying child support to her 
first husband for their two children, who are now 14 and 17 years old. Payments are 
made by garnishment. (Items 4 to 11, 15) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to low paying positions, not having 
health insurance until she married her current husband, and her second husband taking 
money from her while he could not find or maintain steady employment. She did not 
submit any evidence regarding her salary since 2005 or her budget. (Items 4-7.) 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss her 
delinquent accounts. During that interview, she acknowledged her various delinquent 
debts and expressed her intention to pay or resolve them.  She stated she did not 
presently have the money to do so. (Items 6, 7) 
  
1 Subparagraphs 1.xx and 1.yy are not listed in the SOR. There are only 54 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her 
job performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in Paragraph 2 of the SOR regarding personal 
conduct in the workplace. The first incident occurred in September 1997 when a resort 
and casino employer terminated her employment with them after management received 
a complaint from a customer. The second incident occurred in March 1998 when her 
employer found her sleeping on the job at her guard post. She received a written 
reprimand. The same employer terminated Applicant in August 1998 after she missed 
many work days. Applicant was arrested in October 2001 on charges of child 
endangerment and domestic battery when she and her second husband became 
embroiled in a physical argument and their 2-year-old son was bumped into a wall while 
being held by his father. Applicant completed 26 weeks of anger management and the 
charges were dismissed in the state court in March 2005. Applicant also had two 
incidents with her current employer. The first occurred in July 2004 when she claimed 
she needed allergy medicine before going outside the building and pulling weeds. Her 
supervisor ordered her to work first, but Applicant got the medicine first and then 
worked. The supervisor suspended her for two days for insubordination. She was also 
disciplined in September 2004 for poor attendance. (Items 5, 6, 13-15)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and her admissions, Applicant has been unable or 
unwilling to satisfy delinquent debts that began accruing in 2005 and remain unpaid at 
present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2005, 
remain unresolved, and are not isolated, there is insufficient evidence to support a 
finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply. She did not present credible evidence to corroborate her assertions that the 
accumulation of the debt was due to conditions beyond her control or that she 
attempted to responsibly manage that debt once it accrued, as required under AG ¶ 
20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). She did not 
submit evidence that she received credit counseling. She is paying two collection 
agencies for various medical debts, which might indicate that the situation is coming 
under control except the debts total about $10,000. It will take Applicant eight years or 
longer to pay just those debts. With her current husband’s medical insurance she 
should not be incurring further substantial medical debts. However, one debt owed to a 
hospital is $18,014 (SOR Para. 1. aaa) which will take another 10 years for Applicant to 
pay at $200 monthly. She does not have an agreement with that hospital according to 
the documents she submitted with her Answer. Nor did she present evidence that she 
 
6 
 
 
made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve any of the 54 debts because all payments are 
being made pursuant to a garnishment order. Applicant did not provide documentation 
verifying that she formally disputed or investigated any debt, which evidence is 
necessary to trigger the application of AG & 20(d). There is no evidence to support the 
application of AG & 20(f). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
7 
 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
 (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
 (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
 (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
AG ¶ 16 (d) and (e) disqualifying conditions are applicable.  Applicant has a 
history of employee misconduct and criminal domestic actions from 1997 to 2004. This 
information is not explicitly covered under any other guideline, but it supports a “whole-
person” assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
 
8 
 
 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules, or other characteristics indicating a person 
may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 
Applicant was asleep at her guard post in March 1998 and received a 
suspension for that unreliability. She has been disciplined twice by two different 
employers for poor attendance, in 1998 and 2004. She did not comply with her 
supervisor’s instructions in 2004 about yard maintenance. Applicant was suspended for 
that unwillingness to comply with supervisory instructions. She exercised poor judgment 
when she became involved with her second husband in a domestic battery situation 
while he was holding their 2-year-old child. AG ¶ 16 (d) applies. 
 
All of this misconduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, duress 
that may affect Applicant’s personal and community standing. The domestic battery 
incident is of particular concern because of the anger displayed and the physical actions 
taken by Applicant against her husband and child. AG ¶ 16 (e) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate 
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability; and, 
 
 
9 
 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased 
or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of these mitigating conditions apply because Applicant did not submit any 
evidence that any of them could be applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, a 
parent of three children, who has worked for a federal contractor since 2004.  In August 
2010, she learned of the Government’s concerns and placed on notice that her 
delinquent debts were creating security concerns and potentially affecting her 
employment.  Despite that knowledge, she did not provide proof that she has taken any 
pro-active steps to address the delinquent debts, instead waiting to be sued and have 
her wages garnished by two creditors. Furthermore, Applicant failed to demonstrate 
financial rehabilitation, which is required to assure the Government that the recurrence 
or continuance of these unaddressed obligations is unlikely. The record contains 
insufficient other evidence about her character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to 
mitigate these concerns or make their continuation less likely. 
 
Applicant’s financial predicament is coupled with her personal conduct in the 
workplace and the home she shared in 2001 with her second husband. Her conduct in 
these six incidents show a lack of trustworthiness, unreliability, a failure to follow rules, 
and failure to comply with directions from her supervisors. She engaged in these actions 
 
10 
 
 
voluntarily while an adult. She did not demonstrate any rehabilitation that would diminish 
the likelihood that they could occur in the future.   
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations 
and personal conduct. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j, 1.m, 1o to 1.z:   Against Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 1.aa to 1.qq:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.rr to 1.ww:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.zz to 1.ddd:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2. a through 2.f:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
