 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06545 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance or access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories pertaining to his subject 
interview. He responded to the interrogatories on January 13, 2010.2 On another 
unspecified date, DOHA issued him another set of interrogatories pertaining to his 
financial situation. He responded to the interrogatories on January 13, 2010.3 On 
1 Item 5 (SF 86), dated June 30, 2009. 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 13, 2010). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
November 17, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 30, 2010. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated December 13, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on January 6, 2011, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 2011, and that 
same day, submitted a letter to Department Counsel.4 The case was assigned to me on 
February 16, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.ee. of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a managed systems engineer.5 He was granted a SECRET security clearance in 1999.6 
He was married in 2003,7 and he and his wife have one daughter, born in 2008.8 
Applicant was enjoying a successful military career from 1996 until he was diagnosed 
with cancer,9 and in July 2005, he was given an honorable discharge due to his 
condition.10 From August 2005 until September 2007, Applicant was employed by a 
 
3 Item 7 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated January 13, 2010). 
 
4 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, dated January 25, 2011, was forwarded to Department Counsel by a 
Legal Assistant to the Department Counsel on February 1, 2011. 
 
5 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
6 Id. at 7, 12. 
 
7 Id. at 8. 
 
8 Id. at 9. 
 
9 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 4. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
contractor as a communications system engineer,11 and from September 2007 until 
March 2009, he was employed by another contractor.12 In March 2009, he was laid off 
due to the expiration of a contract, and remained in that status until June 2009,13 when 
he assumed his position with his current employer. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2004-2006. 
Applicant was diagnosed with cancer and had to undergo chemotherapy treatment, and 
after his discharge from active duty, his health insurance ended and he was unable to 
pay for the mounting medical bills.14 He was also unemployed during March – June 
2009, but the impact of this relatively brief period of unemployment has not been 
explained. At some unspecified point, accounts started to become delinquent. Some of 
the accounts were placed for collection with a variety of collection agents, and some of 
the accounts were charged off.  
 
The SOR identified 31 continuing delinquencies as reflected by credit reports 
from 200915 and 2010,16 totaling approximately $21,521. Among the delinquencies are 
accounts pertaining to medical providers, cable television service, satellite television 
service, automobile loan, clothing, department stores, jewelry and cameras, gasoline, 
and telephone service. Some accounts have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to 
other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in 
different credit reports, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under 
the same creditor name or under a different creditor name. Some accounts are 
identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account 
numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits, and in others eliminating 
other digits.  
 
In August 2009, while being interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant indicated he had made no attempts to enter 
into negotiations with his SOR creditors in an effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.17 
The sole exception was an account with a clothing store, and Applicant contacted the 
creditor and arranged a settlement, which he had not yet paid.18 He stated that he 
 
10 Item 8 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214), dated July 6, 2005). 
 
11 Item, 5, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
12 Id. at 5. 
 
13 Id. at 5, 7. 
 
14 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 4. 
 
15 Item 9 (Combined Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 14, 2009). 
 
16 Item 10 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 16, 2010). 
 
17 Personal Subject Interview, dated August 3, 2009, attached to Item 6, supra note 2, at 1-2. 
 
18 Id. at 1. 
 
4 
                                      
 
g any other 
ayments. 
uch topics as debt consolidation, money management, repayment plans, or budgeting.  
500 in bank 
savings.23 Applicant inherited five cars, two motorcycles, and one Jet Ski.24 
Policies 
ion “only upon a 
nding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26   
 
hich are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
would establish payment plans with his creditors.19 He subsequently attempted to 
contact his creditors, and managed to pay off one non-SOR account in the amount of 
$861.23.20 He settled on a reduced balance for one SOR account (SOR ¶ 1.w.).21 To 
date, Applicant has produced no evidence to indicate that he has contacted his 
remaining creditors, established repayment plans, or commenced makin
p
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant ever received financial counseling covering 
s
 
 Applicant prepared a personal financial statement, indicating a family monthly net 
income of $7,768.84, monthly living expenses of $3,086.45, and a monthly net 
remainder of $4,682.39 available for discretionary spending.22 He has $3,
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”25 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified informat
fi
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, w
 
 
19 Id. at 1-2. 
 
20 Item 7, supra note 3, at 6. 
 
21 Id. at 7. 
 
22 Personal Financial Statement, dated January 13, 2010, attached to Item 7, at 4. 
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
26 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
” The administrative judge must consider 
ll available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavo
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. T
ntial, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials
that are 
                                                          
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.
a
rable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”27 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
he burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.28  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to pote
.”29 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”30 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions 
27 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
28 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
29 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
30 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded n mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
o
 
7 
                                      
 
ncial Considerations 
 
ancially 
verextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
gative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” is potentially disqualifying. 
, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 
July 2005 when he was discharged from active duty and lost his medical insurance. At 
some 
those debts, he failed to reduce his expenses for such items as cable television service, 
satellite television service, or jewelry and cameras. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) apply. 
 
ial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may b nt, or 
occurr doubt 
on the r AG 
¶ 20(b sulted 
in the ss of 
employ vorce 
r separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
 is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Fina
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is fin
o
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Also, under AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant ne
 
As noted above
unspecified point, he failed to keep up with his monthly payments, and accounts 
started to become delinquent. Some accounts were placed for collection and some 
accounts were charged off. Applicant attributed his financial situation initially to being 
without medical insurance, and eventually to being unemployed. Nevertheless, the 
record is silent as to why Applicant’s delinquent accounts remained unaddressed by him 
after he secured his current employment in June 2009; why with a substantial inventory 
of motor vehicles and several thousand dollars now in the bank; and with $4,682.39 
currently available for discretionary spending each month, he did not start paying off his 
delinquent debts. Likewise, he did not explain why, when he had no money to pay his 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
oncerns arising from financc
e mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infreque
ed under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, unde
), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that re
 financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., lo
ment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, di
o
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem
 
8 
                                      
 
(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
cial difficulties to his medical condition, 
e loss of health insurance, and the period of unemployment, he never explained how 
they b e or 
even a tion 
is freq , AG 
¶ 20(a nces, 
casts d
 both 
discha nce coverage during 
 critical period that saw the proliferation of medical bills associated with his treatment. 
ent accounts. The reasons stated 
do not establish he acted “responsibly under the circumstances.”  
nresolved, and while there are some indications that he intends to repay 
those delinquent debts eventually, as well as some indications that some debts may 
have b
mitigating under AG & 20
Athe individual initiated a good
resolve debts.@31  
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced in July 2005, and still have not been 
resolved. While he attributed his continuing finan
th
ecame the primary cause of his financial problems, or why he failed to resolv
ddress his delinquent accounts after June 2009. Because the financial situa
uent and continuing in nature, and the causation is not adequately described
) does not apply. Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumsta
oubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because his medical condition caused him to be
rged from active military service and to lose his health insura
a
The relatively brief period of unemployment also exacerbated his financial situation. 
However, sufficient time has passed since he generated his medical bills and obtained 
employment, and he still did not address his delinqu
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant received 
financial counseling.  
 
Applicant receives very limited application of AG ¶ 20(d) because, with two 
exceptions, he ignored his delinquent accounts. The vast majority of them remain 
unpaid or u
een paid, partially or otherwise, he has offered little documentation to indicate the 
terms of his repayment agreements, or any indication from the various collection 
agencies that they have agreed to his proposed terms, or to confirm that such 
agreements exist. In the absence of such documentation, most of the evidence consists 
of promises to pay or unsupported contentions that some creditors may have been paid. 
 
                                                          
31 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a leg
vailable option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [th
ally 
e 
ood-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal 
 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
a
“g
citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
lity of the applicant’s 
onduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
he 
le 
he 
to 
of 
on 
or 
 security 
ideration 
 He was 
y service 
ve it. His 
 he was 
ent, and 
gs to do, 
bstantial. 
Applicant ha financial 
ment for 
his financial pplicant’s 
 current 
cles and 
ilable for 
nt debts. 
ebts, he 
failed to red r such items as cable television service, satellite 
television service, or jewelry and cameras. The period of inaction reflect traits which 
raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. I have evaluated the 
various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not 
merely performed a piecemeal analysis.32 His limited good-faith efforts are insufficient 
to mitigate continuing security concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
                                                          
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the tota
c
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) t
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeab
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) t
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivati
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful cons
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct.
afflicted with a condition that caused him to be discharged from active militar
and to lose health insurance at a point in his life when it was necessary to ha
medical condition generated a substantial number of medical bills. And
unemployed for several months. Nevertheless, after obtaining new employm
health insurance, the vast majority of his accounts are simply on his list of thin
eventually. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is su
s a history of financial delinquencies. He ignored his 
responsibilities, and simply referred to his medical condition and his unemploy
difficulties. As noted above, the record is silent as to why A
delinquent accounts remained unaddressed by him after he secured his
employment in June 2009; why with a substantial inventory of motor vehi
several thousand dollars now in the bank; and with $4,682.39 currently ava
discretionary spending each month, he did not start paying off his delinque
Likewise, he did not explain why, when he had no money to pay his those d
uce his expenses fo
32 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Applicant 
  Subparagraph t Applicant 
  Subparagraph t Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d: gainst Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.w:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.z:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.aa:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.bb:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.cc:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.dd:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ee:    Against Applicant 
   
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against 
1.b:    Agains
1.c:    Agains
   A
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
