 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )        ISCR Case No. 09-06543     
                                                                      )                                                                                    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on 
January 20, 2009. On September 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 20, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 7, 2010. The FORM contained 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
documents identified as Items 1 through 5. In addition, the Government compiled facts 
about Taiwan from 16 official U.S. Government publications and requested that I take 
administrative notice of those facts. By letter dated December 7, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM, the factual summary containing information about 
Taiwan, and the source documents from which those facts were derived to Applicant, 
with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt.  Applicant received the file on December 12, 2010. His response was due on 
January 11, 2011. 
 
Applicant timely submitted four additional documents: a cover letter, containing 
additional facts and explanation, and three letters of character reference. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s submissions. On January 31, 2011, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s four documents as Exhibit (Ex.) A 
through Ex. D and admitted them to the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) and three allegations that raise security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.c.). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all Guideline B allegations and all Guideline C 
allegations. His admissions are admitted as findings of fact.  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant was interviewed about his citizenship status and 
employment history by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM). He also responded to interrogatories sent to him by DOHA. On 
July 2, 2009, Applicant provided a 33-page affidavit to an OPM investigator.1  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, married, and the father of a teenaged son. He is 
employed by a government contractor and seeks a security clearance for the first time. 
(Item 4 at 37; Item 5 at 51.) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan, where he earned an undergraduate 
degree in computer science. As an undergraduate, his special academic interests were 
artificial intelligence and computational linguistics. (Item 4; Item 5 at 34.)  
 
 In 1991, Applicant came to the United States for graduate study. In 1992, he and 
his wife, who was also born, raised, and educated in Taiwan, were married. In 1994, 
Applicant earned a Master of Science degree in Computer Science from a U.S. 
university. Applicant’s wife earned a Ph.D. in biology with a concentration in virology 
from a U.S. university. (Item 4 at 10, 18; Item 5 at 30, 45.) 
 
 
1 On November 24, 2009, Applicant reviewed the investigator’s summary of the interview and his affidavit. 
He provided a sworn statement in which he adopted the investigator’s summary and the affidavit as 
accurate. He did not dispute the accuracy of the information in those documents, which is recited herein. 
(Item 5 at 62-64.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 In January 2004, Applicant and his brother-in-law, who is a Taiwan-born 
naturalized U.S. citizen, co-founded and incorporated a business in the United States. 
The company’s original product was radio frequency identification. Since incorporation, 
the company also developed hardware, firmware, and monitoring devices. Applicant is 
Chief Technology Officer of the company. His brother-in-law is Chief Executive. The 
company has no other employees. (Item 5 at 49-50.) 
 
 In December 2005, Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens. 
Applicant acquired a U.S. passport in December 2005. On his January 2009 SF-86, 
Applicant identified himself and his wife as dual citizens of the United States and 
Taiwan. He continued to use his Taiwan passport to enter Taiwan until about April 2009. 
In April 2009, shortly before his first security interview, he surrendered his Taiwan 
passport to his employer’s facility security officer for destruction. At the security 
interview, he told an authorized investigator that he would be willing to renounce his 
Taiwan citizenship in order to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3, Enclosure 4; Item 4 
at 7, 8, 18, 19, 30; Item 5 at 28.) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant accepted employment as Chief Technology Officer with a 
Taiwanese company that produces wireless sensing platforms and sensor networks. 
His employment package included the following: a 7% stake or interest in the value of 
the company; a seat on the company’s Board; an annual salary of approximately 
$37,000 to $38,000 USD; a one-month salary for Chinese New Year; and travel 
expenses for two round trips per year to Taiwan to conduct company business. 
Applicant’s salary was deposited in a Taiwan bank. He then wired funds from his 
Taiwan bank account to his U.S. bank account for withdrawal.2 (Item 5 at 36-37.) 
 
 The company owned by Applicant and his brother-in-law licensed one of its 
firmware products to the Taiwanese company that employed Applicant as Chief 
Technology Officer. The U.S. government contractor sponsoring Applicant for a security 
clearance has also hired his brother-in-law and business partner. Applicant reported 
that his brother-in-law had been awarded a security clearance. He also stated that his 
mother, his wife, his sister, his brother-in-law, and his wife’s friend and her husband 
were aware that he was undergoing a security investigation.3 (Item 5 at 38, 48-49, 53.)   
 
 Applicant’s mother, a widow and a retired English teacher, is a citizen and 
resident of Taiwan. Applicant communicates with his mother by telephone two to four 
 
2 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that he served as Chief Technical Officer of the 
company from “about May 2005 to June 2008.” He further reported that the company ceased all 
operations on July 31, 2010.  He provided a letter to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and owner of the 
company, dated September 10, 2010, whereby he divested himself of all interest in the company. He also 
provided a letter from the CEO and owner confirming that Applicant had no existing ownership in the 
company. (Item 3, Enclosure 2, Enclosure 3.)   
 
3 The individuals Applicant identified as having knowledge of his security investigation all have 
connections with Taiwan. (Item 5 at 48-49, 53.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
times a month. He communicates with her by e-mail occasionally. Whenever he travels 
to Taiwan, Applicant resides at his mother’s home. (Item 5 at 15.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. 
Applicant’s father-in-law has an ownership interest in a business that imports metal to 
make tools. His mother-in-law is a retired teacher. Applicant sees his in-laws when he 
travels to Taiwan, and he plays tennis with his father-in-law. (Item 5 at 47-48.) 
 
 Between 2001 and 2008, Applicant made 19 visits, for business and pleasure, to 
Taiwan. He also visited the People’s Republic of China (PRC) twice on business. In 
2004, he met with representatives of the PRC automotive industry on behalf of the U.S. 
company he owns with his brother-in-law. He visited Italy once for pleasure. His most 
recent trip to Taiwan occurred in April and May 2009, when he visited his mother. In 
2008, Applicant voted in Taiwan’s Presidential election. (Item 4 at 27-33, Item 5 at 34, 
57-58.) 
 
 In an affidavit he provided in July 2009, Applicant acknowledged that he also 
possessed a Taiwanese National Identity Card. He opined that the card “is probably 
packed away somewhere in a box.” He further stated that he had not renewed the card. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant reported that he surrendered his Taiwanese 
National Identity Card to his facility security officer (FSO) on October 3, 2010. He also 
provided a letter from the FSO, dated October 4, 2010, reporting that Applicant had 
relinquished the card to him for the purpose of destruction.  (Item 3 at 2, Enclosure 5; 
Item 5 at 32.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant admitted he possessed a bank 
account in Taiwan with a cash value of approximately $1,000 USD. He stated that the 
account could be closed at any time, but to do so, he would need to travel to Taiwan 
and close the account himself. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he used 
the account for emergency purposes when visiting his mother and in-laws in Taiwan. He 
reported that he had closed the account on October 15, 2010. (Item 3, Enclosure 
14;Item 5 at 9.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation that he had 
divested himself of any ownership interest in the Taiwanese company that employed 
him from 2005 to 2008. He also provided documentation intended to show that he had 
closed his bank account in Taiwan.5 He provided documentation corroborating his 
statement that he had voluntarily surrendered his Taiwanese passport and his 
Taiwanese Identity Card to his FSO, and that both documents had been destroyed. He 
claimed that prior to submitting his application for a security clearance, he did not know 
that, as a U.S. citizen, he could not vote in a foreign election. In response to the FORM, 
 
4 Applicant’s Item 3, Enclosure 1 was written in Chinese. No translation from Chinese into English was 
provided by the Applicant. I was unable to determine if the document corroborated Applicant’s assertion 
that the account had been closed. (Item 3, Enclosure 1.) 
  
5 Please see Footnote 4. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant argued that he had provided information to mitigate the security concerns 
raised in SOR allegations 1.c., 1.d., 2.a., 2.b., and 2.c. (Item 3; Response to FORM, Ex. 
A.)  
 
 Applicant provided three letters of character reference in his response to the 
FORM. The individuals who wrote in support of Applicant worked with and observed him 
in his position with his current employer. One writer praised his knowledge of sensor 
technology. Another writer noted that Applicant was “an extremely bright, hardworking 
and totally dedicated individual.” The third writer noted that Applicant is “an outstanding 
professional and a self-starter.” (Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Taiwan, as contained in 
official U.S. Government documents provided by Department Counsel to Applicant in 
the FORM: 
 
In 1949, following a civil war between the Nationalist Chinese and the 
Chinese Communist Party, two million refugees, predominately Nationalist 
members and supporters, fled from mainland China to Taiwan. That same 
year, Communists in mainland China established the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC or China), and Chiang Kai-shek established a separate, 
provisional capital for his government in Taipei, Taiwan. The PRC does 
not recognize Taiwan’s independence and insists that there is only “one 
China.” After long recognizing Taiwan, on January 1, 1979, the U.S. 
formally recognized the government of the PRC as the sole legal 
government of China. The U.S. does not support independence for 
Taiwan and is committed to a “one-China policy,” under the Taiwan 
Relations Act, signed into law on April 10, 1979. 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy that has significant economic contacts 
with China, and it has developed a strong economy since its separation 
from the PRC in 1949. Despite substantial economic ties, the People’s 
Republic of China did not hold any official talks with Taiwan from October 
1998 until June 2008. Moreover, the governments of Taiwan and the 
People’s Republic of China still do not negotiate directly. “The military’s 
primary mission is the defense of Taiwan against the P.R.C., which is 
seen as the predominant threat and which has not renounced the use of 
force against Taiwan.” The PRC’s Ministry of State Security is the 
“preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and maintains 
intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwan connections. 
 
Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, 
and the National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Annual Report to 
Congress of Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists 
Taiwan as being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and 
 
6 
 
 
proprietary information. The 2000 Report highlights specific incidents 
wherein Taiwan engaged in attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
There have been various cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Taiwan, including: 
(1) laser gun aimer/ sights; (2) measuring probes controlled for nuclear 
nonproliferation and national security reasons; (3) centrifugal pumps that 
are controlled for chemical and biological weapons and anti-terrorism 
reasons; (4) Metal Organic Vapor Disposition tools controlled for national 
security and anti-terrorism reasons; (5) fluid control valves that are 
controlled for national security, foreign policy, nonproliferation or anti-
terrorism reasons; (6) radio communication encryption modules; and (7) 
controlled nickel powder. 
 
Additionally, in December 2005, Donald Keyser, the Principal Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, pled guilty 
to illegally removing classified materials and to providing false statements 
to the U.S. Government. Mr. Keyser was engaged in a relationship with, 
and met with, an intelligence office employed by the National Intelligence 
Bureau, the foreign intelligence agency of the government of Taiwan. 
 
(FORM at 3-7; footnotes and citations omitted.) 
Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
7 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. Applicant’s close contacts and relationships with family members who are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.” Moreover, Applicant shares his home with his wife, a naturalized U.S. 
citizen whose parents are citizens and residents of Taiwan. These circumstances raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 7(d), which reads: “sharing living quarters with a person 
or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk 
of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Additionally, Applicant’s 
financial and business interests in Taiwan raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7(e). AG 
¶ 7(e) reads: “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual 
to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
 
9 
 
 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, 
financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” then 
AG ¶ 8(f) might be applicable. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation establishing that he 
was no longer employed by the Taiwanese company he worked for from May 2005 until 
June 2008. Additionally, Applicant provided documentation to corroborate his statement 
that he no longer held a financial interest in the company, which ceased operations in 
July 2010. Since Applicant no longer has a business interest in the company and is no 
longer employed by the company, I conclude that mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(f) applies 
to SOR allegation at ¶ 1.d. for Applicant. 
 
It was Applicant’s responsibility to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s case. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant offered Enclosure 1 to show 
that he no longer possessed the bank account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. However, 
Enclosure 1 was written in Chinese, and Applicant failed to provide an English 
translation of the document. I was unable, therefore, to conclude that the document 
established that Applicant no longer held the account with a bank in Taiwan. I conclude 
that Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof because his evidence did not resolve 
reasonable doubts about his continued ownership of the Taiwanese bank account.        
 
Two additional Guideline B allegations also raise security concerns. While the 
United States and Taiwan share common democratic values, Taiwan is strongly 
focused on protecting itself from possible military action from the PRC. Toward that end, 
Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information 
that could assist in strengthening its defensive position, and it has targeted U.S. 
government organizations in order to acquire U.S. technology. American citizens with 
immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Taiwan could be vulnerable 
to coercion, exploitation, inducements, or pressure by those seeking to acquire 
proprietary or otherwise restricted U.S. technology for the benefit of Taiwan.  
 
 Applicant’s mother, father-in-law, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Taiwan. Applicant communicates with his mother by telephone two to four times a 
month. He shares his home with his wife, whose parents are residents and citizens of 
Taiwan. He visits his wife’s parents when he goes to Taiwan. His father-in-law has 
business interests in Taiwan. 
  
 Applicant’s relationships with his mother and his in-laws are neither casual nor 
infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of affection and obligation. 
Applicant is in close familial contact with his mother. While he communicates less 
frequently with his wife’s parents, he nevertheless has long-standing familial obligations 
to them.  
 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. proprietary information. Applicant’s mother, 
a citizen and resident of Taiwan, knows he is being investigated for a security clearance 
as a federal contractor, as do his wife, brother-in-law, sister, and his wife’s friend and 
her husband, all of whom have connections to Taiwan. Applicant’s brother-in-law and 
business partner is his co-worker as a federal contractor.6 Applicant failed to meet his 
burden of providing information to rebut or mitigate the security concerns raised by AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). I therefore conclude that the mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 
8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
 
6  It is not clear from the record if other friends, business contacts, and family members know of the 
nature of Applicant’s work as a federal contractor, but if they did, this could raise additional conflict of 
interest concerns that might also threaten U.S. security interests. 
 
11 
 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2005, Applicant used his Taiwanese passport 
multiple times to travel to Taiwan to conduct business related to his employment with 
and financial interest in a Taiwan-based company. He possessed a Taiwanese National 
Identification card. He voted in the Taiwan Presidential election in 2008. These actions 
after becoming a U.S. citizen raise a concern that he actively exercises dual citizenship 
with Taiwan and suggest a preference for a foreign country over the United States. I 
conclude that Applicant’s conduct raises potentially disqualifying security concerns 
under AG ¶¶10 (a)(1), 10(a)(3), 10(a)(5),10(a)(7) and 10(b). 
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign 
passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport 
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” Under AG ¶ 11(f), a vote in a foreign election might be mitigated if it “was 
encouraged by the United States Government.” 
 
Applicant claimed dual citizenship on the SF-86 he completed in January 2009. 
After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2005, he used his Taiwan passport from 2005 until 
2009 to enter Taiwan. Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant’s use of his 
Taiwanese passport was approved by a cognizant security authority. However, when he 
was interviewed by an authorized investigator, he stated he would be willing to 
renounce his dual citizenship in order to obtain a security clearance. He surrendered his 
Taiwan passport and his Taiwanese National Identification card to his facility security 
officer, who destroyed both documents. At the present time, it appears that Applicant’s 
dual citizenship is based solely on his birth in Taiwan. 
 
12 
 
 
 
In 2008, Applicant exercised his Taiwanese citizenship by voting in Taiwan’s 
Presidential election. When he cast his vote, he was a 42-year-old U.S. citizen. Nothing 
in the record indicates that Applicant’s vote in the Taiwanese Presidential election was 
encouraged by the United States Government. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 
11(a), 11(b), and 11(e) apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. I also 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 11(c). 11(d), and 11(f) do not apply in mitigation in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and well-
educated professional with a specialty in computer science and radio frequency 
identification hardware, firmware, and monitoring devices. He has close familial ties with 
his mother and his wife’s parents, all of whom are citizens of Taiwan. He is in frequent 
contact with his family members and travels to Taiwan often to visit his mother. 
Although he was U.S. citizen, he voted in Taiwan’s Presidential election in 2008, 
thereby expressing a preference for Taiwan. Taiwan actively seeks to collect proprietary 
information from U.S. businesses and government contractors. Because of his close 
relationships with Taiwanese citizens, Applicant could be vulnerable to foreign 
exploitation, inducement, pressure, or coercion.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the   
foreign influence and foreign preference adjudicative guidelines.  
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:                       For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.: For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
