 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )     ISCR Case No. 09-06971                                            
                                                                      )                                                                                    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on 
June 18, 2009. On November 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). DOHA 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 8, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested 
that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 30, 2010. The FORM 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6. By letter dated December 30, 
2010, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on January 6, 2011. His response was due on February 5, 2011. 
Applicant did not submit any information or file any objections within the required time 
period. On February 23, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
There are three typographical errors in the SOR. The errors are not substantive 
in nature. However, they are extraneous matter and should be deleted from the SOR. 
According, I sua sponte delete “response; see left side)” from the SOR allegation at ¶ 
2.a.; the “)” at the end of the SOR allegation at ¶ 2.d.; and the “s” in “resides” from the 
SOR allegation at ¶ 2.l. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation that raises a security concern under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶ 1.a.), and 13 allegations that raise security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.m.). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline C allegation and all Guideline B allegations. His 
admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 On July 21, 2009, Applicant was interviewed about his citizenship status by an 
authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). On April 
15, 2010, he provided signed, sworn responses to foreign influence and foreign 
preference interrogatories sent to him by DOHA.1  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and employed as a network engineer and systems 
administrator by a government contractor. He married in 1997 and divorced in 2004. In 
2005, he remarried. He is the father of three children, ages two, four and ten. In 2004, 
he was granted access to public trust and privileged information. (Item 4 at 1, 3, 5-6, 12-
13.) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Brazil. He immigrated to the United States in 
1992. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. On his SF 86, Applicant identified 
himself as a dual citizen of the United States and Brazil. In 2006, he renewed his 
Brazilian passport and used it to enter Brazil in 2007. On April 1, 2010, Applicant 
surrendered his Brazilian passport to his facility security officer (FSO). In the event that 
 
1 On April 15, 2010, Applicant reviewed the investigator’s summary of his personal subject interview and 
made several corrections and clarifications. He corrected a travel date from 2004 to 2002; he provided 
correct birth dates for an uncle, an aunt, a cousin, and his parents-in-law; he clarified his wife’s and his 
sister-in-law’s names; and he listed a part-time job he had forgotten to mention during his interview. 
Subject to those corrections and clarifications, he provided a sworn statement in which he adopted the 
investigator’s summary as accurate. He did not dispute the accuracy of the information in the interview or 
in his interrogatory responses, which is recited herein. (Item 5, 3-35.) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s Brazilian passport is returned to him, the FSO will notify DOHA. (Item 4 at 1; 
Item 5 at 5, 27; Item 6.)  
 
 In 2006, after becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant voted in the Brazilian 
presidential election. He stated that his reason for voting in the Brazilian presidential 
election was that it was “[r]equired by Brazilian law.” He stated in response to DOHA 
interrogatories that he owes a duty to Brazil to vote in the Brazilian presidential election 
every four years. (Item 5 at 22, 31, 34.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided the following additional information: 
 
While I did vote in the Brazilian Presidential elections in 2006, I do not 
agree that this shows a preference for a foreign country over the United 
States. I voted because it was a requirement of the Brazilian citizenship. 
There was never any need to renounce the Brazilian citizenship, so as a 
dual citizen I still follow the laws and duties of both countries. Never before 
(as I still don’t see it now) have any of the laws or duties caused a conflict 
of interest. I also vote in the United States elections, and as voting in the 
United States is not mandatory, that is clearly done by choice. My whole 
life is here in the United States, and I surrendered my Brazilian passport 
when given the choice. My children are American citizens and this is the 
country I chose to call home. 
 
If it is a requirement that I formally renounce my Brazilian citizenship, I am 
willing to do so, as I have previously stated throughout this process. It is 
only really a matter that was never an issue before. 
 
(Item 3 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Brazil and a U.S. resident alien. She resides with 
Applicant in the United States. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Brazil. Applicant’s wife’s stepfather, a citizen and resident of Brazil, 
serves in the Brazilian military. Applicant speaks with his wife’s stepfather and her 
mother about once a month. (Item 3; Item 5 at 6, 11.) 
 
 Applicant has two sisters-in-law. Both women are citizens of Brazil. One of the 
sisters resides in Brazil; the other sister resides in the United States. Applicant sees his 
sister-in-law who resides in the United States every other week. (Item 4; Item 5 at 15.)   
 
 Applicant’s father, a university professor, is a citizen and resident of Brazil. 
Applicant considers his relationship with his father to be close, although he speaks with 
his father on the telephone only about six times a year. From 1986 to 1994, Applicant’s 
father served as an advisor to an international defense organization and to a Brazilian 
military educational organization. (Item 5 at 6, 9, 19.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s brother, with whom he works, is a citizen of Brazil and a U.S. 
registered alien. Applicant sees his brother every day. Applicant’s sister, a lawyer and 
U.S. resident, is a dual citizen of Brazil and the United States. Applicant sees his sister 
weekly. (Item 4; Item 5 at 14, 19.) 
 
 Applicant’s aunt, uncle, and cousin are citizens and residents of Brazil. The uncle 
works in advertising and the aunt is a doctor of pathology. Applicant’s cousin is a   
homemaker and psychologist. Her children and Applicant’s children are about the same 
ages. Applicant has telephone contact with his aunt and uncle every few months. He 
has telephone or internet contact with his cousin several times a year. (Item 5 at 5, 20.) 
 
 In addition to his family members, Applicant identified several friends who are 
citizens of Brazil residing in the United States. He sees these friends socially about six 
times a year. (Item 5 at 18-19.) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant provided technical advice and support on an architectural 
matter to a unit of the Brazilian military in the United States. On his SF 86, Applicant 
reported contact with the Embassy of Brazil to register the births of his children, to 
obtain travel documents for his children, to finalize his divorce, and to register his 
marriage. (Item 1; Item 3; Item 4 at 10.) 
 
 Neither party provided facts about the government and policies of Brazil or its 
historical and present political relationship with the United States.     
  
                                                     Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
5 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Brazil. He immigrated to the United States in 
1992, and he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2004. In 2006, he voted in a Brazilian 
 
7 
 
 
presidential election. Applicant defended his vote in the Brazilian presidential election by 
stating that Brazilian citizens are compelled to vote in that country’s presidential 
elections. He also stated that he would formally renounce his Brazilian citizenship if 
required to do so. Applicant’s vote in Brazil’s presidential election suggests a preference 
for a foreign country over the United States and it raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
10(a)(7) and 10(b). 
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(f), a U.S. 
citizen’s vote in a foreign election might be mitigated if it “was encouraged by the United 
States Government.” 
 
In 2006, Applicant exercised his Brazilian citizenship by voting in Brazil’s 
presidential election. When he cast his vote, he was a 35-year-old U.S. citizen. Nothing 
in the record indicates that Applicant’s vote in the Brazilian presidential election was 
encouraged by the United States Government. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), and 
11 (f) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Applicant defended his vote in the Brazilian election by stating that voting in a 
Brazilian presidential election was a requirement of Brazilian citizenship. In his answer 
to the SOR, he stated that he did not agree that by voting in the Brazilian election he 
showed a preference for Brazil over the United States. He stated that he also voted in 
U.S. elections voluntarily. Additionally, he stated that his whole life was in the United 
States, and the United States was the country he chose to call home. He also stated 
that he would renounce his Brazilian citizenship if he was required to do so by the 
United States. Applicant’s written statements reflect ambivalence and divided loyalty 
regarding his Brazilian dual citizenship. However, his willingness to renounce his 
Brazilian citizenship if required to do so merits partial mitigation under AG ¶ 11(b). 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 identifies foreign influence security concerns as follows: “[f]oreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” Additionally, adjudications under 
Guideline B “can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Neither party provided information for the record about the government of Brazil 
and its political and economic relationship with the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Brazil and a resident U.S. alien. She resides in the 
United States with Applicant. Her mother and father are citizens and residents of Brazil. 
Her stepfather serves in the Brazilian military. Her two sisters are citizens of Brazil: one 
is a U.S. resident; the other is a resident of Brazil. Applicant has frequent familial 
contact with his wife’s immediate relatives. 
 
 Applicant’s father, a professor, is a citizen and resident of Brazil. Applicant feels 
close to his father and communicates with him several times a year. Applicant’s brother 
is a citizen of Brazil and a resident U.S. alien. Applicant sees his brother every day 
because the two men work together. Applicant’s sister is a dual citizen of Brazil and the 
United States. She resides in the United States and Applicant sees her weekly. 
Additionally, Applicant’s uncle, aunt, and cousin are citizens and residents of Brazil. 
Applicant maintains regular contact with these relatives. He also has several friends 
who are citizens of Brazil and residents of the United States, and he has contacts with 
these individuals several times a year. In 2009, Applicant provided technical support 
and advice on an architectural matter to a Brazilian military group in the United States.  
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.” AG ¶ 7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, 
regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. 
 
9 
 
 
Government business or are approved by the cognizant security authority,” then AG ¶ 
8(d) might apply. 
 
Applicant has extensive family and friendship ties with citizens and residents of 
Brazil. He shares his home with his wife, who is a citizen of Brazil. Additionally, 
Applicant’s relationships with his father, his siblings, his aunt and uncle, his cousin, his 
in-laws, and his wife’s stepfather, a member of the Brazilian military, are neither casual 
nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of affection and obligation. 
Applicant is in frequent familial contact with most of his family members who are citizens 
and residents of Brazil. Moreover, Applicant has friendship connections with Brazilian 
citizens residing in the United States, and he provided technical assistance to a 
Brazilian military group in the United States. 
 
Applicant has the burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
clearance decision. That burden of persuasion includes presenting evidence to warrant 
application of Guideline B mitigating conditions. The Government does not have the 
burden of affirmatively disproving the applicability of the foreign influence mitigating 
conditions. In this FORM case, Applicant has failed to produce sufficient evidence to 
establish that any of the Guideline B mitigating conditions applies to the allegations that 
he has admitted. Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline B mitigating 
conditions apply in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
Applicant is a loyal and communicative family member and friend. He has close 
familial ties with his father, his in-laws, his wife’s stepfather, his aunt, uncle, and cousin, 
all of whom are citizens and residents of Brazil. He is in frequent contact with his family 
members in Brazil. Although he is a U.S. citizen, he voted in Brazil’s presidential 
 
10 
 
 
election in 2006, thereby expressing a preference for Brazil. He has provided technical 
assistance to a Brazilian military group in the United States. Applicant failed to provide 
evidence to mitigate the Government’s security concerns about his foreign relationships 
and contacts. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant requested a decision on 
the written record. He did not file a response to the FORM. The written record in this 
case is sparse. Moreover, without an opportunity to assess Applicant’s credibility at a 
hearing, I am unable to conclude that he met his burden of persuasion in mitigating the 
Government’s allegations under the foreign preference and foreign influence 
adjudicative guidelines.         
   
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the foreign 
preference and foreign influence adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                       Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.m.:            Against Applicant 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
