                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04546 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Franciso Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kehinde Watford, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 10, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 13, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 13, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 17. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant objected to GE 1. The objection was overruled and all of the exhibits were 
admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without 
objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 18, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Government withdrew SOR ¶1. b and amended ¶1.i by deleting “1.h” and 
inserting to “1.g.” There was no objection by Applicant’s counsel.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in SOR except ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 31 years old. He has never been married. He has two children, 
ages seven and four. He has earned an associate’s, bachelor’s, and master’s degrees. 
He was in the Army from 1997 to 2000.1  
 
 In approximately October 1998, while in the Army, Applicant was accused of 
being involved in a car accident and fleeing the scene of the accident. He was 
questioned by military police and denied any involvement. He admitted he did not recall 
the accident until it was brought to his attention through the documents he received in 
discovery. His initial testimony was that he was involved in a car accident, but he did not 
flee the scene.2 He then testified he told the police he was not involved in the accident. 
When asked to explain the discrepancy he stated: “I was in the car, but I did not flee the 
scene.”3 At the time, a sergeant made a statement to the military police that he 
observed Applicant back up and hit another car and then flee the scene. Applicant 
stated he was a passenger in the car and he did not recall anyone hitting another car. 
He could not recall, but believed he might have been drinking so his friend was driving. 
He did not recall his friend getting into an accident. He could not recall why there would 
have been damage to his car. He stated he did not recall if he was in the car that night. 
He stated he lent his car to a friend. He did not think his friend was in an accident. He 
had no explanation for how the police matched the damage on his car to the vehicle 
involved in the accident. He did not think his car had damage. He stated that he 
received points on his driving.”4 He did not dispute the points because he stated, “I do 
believe at the time, ma’am the vehicle was mine and agreed to follow the First 
Sergeant’s advice to accept the points and move on.” Applicant then testified that he did 
not recall the accident, but was trying to recall the specifics from the documents that 
1 Tr. 44, 48-49. 
 
2 Tr. 34. 
 
3 Tr. 37. 
 
4 Tr. 58-62. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
were provided by the Government. Applicant’s testimony was convoluted, contradictory, 
and not believable.5  
 
 In 1999, while in the Army, Applicant used another soldier’s credit card without 
authorization to make purchases. Applicant testified he was told by SPC L that the card 
belonged to another soldier with whom SPC L had a sexual relationship and who was 
deployed. Applicant explained that SPC L was given the card from the owner for sexual 
favors. He referred to SPC L as the boyfriend of the other soldier and she did anything 
he asked of her. Applicant stated that SPC L told him he could use the card. He stated 
SPC L accompanied him when he made his purchases. Applicant signed the credit card 
receipts. He told the Criminal Investigative Division (CID) investigator that he just 
scribbled something. At this hearing, he stated that when he used the credit card 
receipts he signed his own name because he believed he was authorized to use the 
credit card. He stated he received permission to use the card from SPC L because he 
was his “home-boy” and SPC L would buy him things, which he did not have to pay him 
back. He believed SPC L was giving him the credit card as a gift, so he could buy 
whatever he wanted and have unlimited use of it without paying. He threw the card 
away when he tried to use it and discovered it was over its limit. He stated that after he 
talked to CID he came to the conclusion that he did not have permission to use the 
credit card. He understands today that he should not have used the card. Applicant’s 
explanation was not credible.6 
 
 In December 1999, Applicant was charged under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ) with seven specifications of larceny. He hired a civilian attorney. He 
later fired the civilian lawyer and obtained a military lawyer to represent him. On 
January 7, 2000, Applicant submitted a signed request to be discharged from the Army 
in lieu of a trial by general court-marital for the larceny charges. He was advised that he 
may receive an other than honorable discharge. Applicant was aware that there was a 
difference between an “honorable discharge” and a “general discharge under honorable 
conditions.” He was also aware that there was a difference between an “other than 
honorable discharge” and a “general discharge under honorable conditions.” On 
January 26, 2000, Applicant’s request to be discharged in lieu of a general court-martial 
was granted by the commanding general. Applicant was subsequently barred entry onto 
all U.S. Government controlled property and facilities under the jurisdiction of the 
commanding general.7  
 
On November 24, 2009, Applicant made a sworn statement to an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator. He stated:  
 
My military lawyer informed [me] that I must pay restitution. I paid $400 
that was provided to me by other soldiers who had used the card. I had 
5 Tr. 34-50, 142-143, 151-156; GE 5. 
 
6 Tr. 37-39, 62-87; 143-145; GE 6. 
 
7 Tr. 87-97; 145-146; GE 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
also purchased items for them. The soldiers mostly NCOs threaten me 
with bodily harm if I involved them. Out of fear, I took the rap for all the 
parties.  
 
* * * 
 
I did not appear before my commanding officer and there was no UCMJ 
action.8  
 
Applicant’s statement to the OPM investigator was false and misleading. 
Applicant’s statement that he was afraid because others were involved with fraudulently 
purchasing items, contradicts his testimony that he was unaware that he did not have 
authorization to use the card.9 
 
In December 2000, Applicant was sitting in a car with a computer, a computer 
chair and a vacuum. The police came up to him and told him that those items were 
stolen. Applicant stated at his hearing that the property belonged to his roommate. 
Applicant allowed the police to search his apartment and additional stolen items are 
found. Applicant denied stealing the property. Applicant was arrested for breaking and 
entering, and larceny. He pled guilty to breaking and entering and was sentenced to a 
fine, community service, and was to pay restitution. Applicant’s explanations about his 
involvement lacked candor, was contradictory, and not credible.10  
 
In approximately April 2001, Applicant was cited for writing a bad check. He 
admitted that he wrote the check, but thought he had sufficient funds in his account and 
did not. He stated he made the payment for the check.11  
 
In approximately July 2001, Applicant was cited for writing a bad check.12 He 
stated he made a down payment on a car and an employee of the car dealership 
agreed to hold the check and not cash it. The check was cashed. Applicant stated that 
the dealer contacted him and agreed he could make the payment. Applicant stated the 
police were not involved.13  
 
In December 2005, Applicant was apprehended after he left a bar where a fight 
had broken out. The police asked to search him and he consented. They found 
marijuana in his pocket. Applicant stated he had mistakenly picked up the wrong coat 
8 GE 3 at 5. 
 
9 Tr. 70-75. 
 
10 Tr. 39-41, 99-108, 148; GE 11, 12. 
 
11 Tr. 41. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
when he left the bar after the fight and the drugs did not belong to him. He was given a 
citation for possession of marijuana. He hired an attorney, who went to court for him, 
and the charge was later dismissed.14 
 
Applicant completed and signed his security clearance application (SCA) on 
March 18, 2009. Section 22 required that he disclose whether he had ever been 
charged with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. It also asked if he was issued a 
summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding. He responded 
“no” to both questions. Applicant stated he did not believe he had to disclose the 
marijuana offense on his SCA because it was dismissed and he was cited and not 
arrested. He stated he was confused by the question. He did not think the offense was 
on his record because the offense was dismissed or expunged and no longer on his 
criminal record. He stated he raced through the SCA and if he had read the directions 
more carefully he would have reported it. Applicant also testified that he did not read 
any of the directions under Section 22 that required him to disclose his police record 
even if a charge was sealed or expunged. Applicant’s testimony was not convincing or 
credible.15  
 
 Section 15 of the SCA asked Applicant if he had ever served in the military. He 
answered “yes.” It also asked: “Have you ever received a discharge that was not 
honorable?” Applicant answered “no.” Applicant listed his type of discharge as 
“honorable.” He did not choose the correct option of “general under honorable 
conditions.” Applicant explained that he rushed through completing his SCA and 
“missed it” and “overlooked” the question about the type of discharge. He said he 
merely made a mistake and he was not trying to lie. He stated he was “totally 
misinformed” and he had a “lack of intelligence.” I find Applicant’s testimony was 
unbelievable and he deliberately falsified his SCA.16 
 
In Applicant’s sworn statement to the OPM investigator on November 24, 2009, 
he stated: 
 
In 12/1999 I was discharged from the U.S. Army with a general discharge 
under honorable conditions, I had attempted to obtain a medical discharge 
and was offered the general discharge instead. There were no UCMJ 
violations.17   
 
When asked at his hearing why he stated he had no UCMJ violations he stated: 
 
14 Tr. 41-42, 110; GE 3, 11. 
 
15 Tr. 43-44, 111-128; GE 1, 3. 
 
16 Tr. 97-99, 128-140; GE 1, 3. 
 
17 GE 3. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
I had kind of—I crossed over that question, but I confirmed with my 
security rep, and said that for Military, just go by the DD-214, and being 
they said in lieu of trial by court-martial, and I got out on a general under 
honorable conditions, I put the answer I thought was best. I wasn’t 100 
percent sure on the answer. But I put the answer—I just went off the DD-
214.18 
 
Applicant’s testimony was not credible. I find he deliberately provided false and 
misleading information in his sworn affidavit. Applicant’s DD Form 214 listed his 
discharge as general under honorable conditions. He listed he was honorably 
discharged. He did not list what was on his DD-214. 
 
Applicant stated he has changed his life and no longer associates with those with 
questionable backgrounds. He has worked hard at pursuing his education and being 
involved in the community. 
 
 I considered all of the documents Applicant provided. I reviewed his performance 
evaluations from 2009 and 2010. He is considered a “successful contributor.” He was 
described as a competent performer and a valued team player, who meets the 
objectives and expectations of the position.19 I considered his talent management 
biography and college transcripts.20 Character letters describe Applicant as easy going 
and generous. He has been an active volunteer at a behavior health center. A friend 
considered him his role model. He is held in high regard because of his volunteer 
service to at-risk youth. He is organized and treats people with respect. He was also 
described as efficient, extremely competent and has excellent communication skills, 
both written and verbal. A soldier who served with Applicant described him as a man of 
utmost integrity and humility.21 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
18 Tr. 47-48. 
 
19 AE B. 
 
20 AE A. 
 
21 Tr. 44-47; AE C. 
 
7 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant was involved in a car accident and fled the scene. He was charged with 
larceny under the UCMJ and was discharged from the Army in lieu of trial by general 
court-martial. He received a “general discharge under honorable conditions.” He misled 
and provided false information to the OPM investigator when he stated there were no 
UCMJ charges against him. He intentionally falsified his SCA application when he listed 
that he received an “honorable” discharge, when in fact he received a “general 
discharge under honorable conditions.” He was aware of the distinction. He intentionally 
falsified his SCA when he failed to disclose his marijuana offense. Applicant also pled 
guilty and was convicted of breaking and entering. Applicant’s history of criminal activity 
and his misrepresentations show a pattern of questionable personal conduct, which 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, and could affect his 
personal, professional, or community standing. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply to Applicant’s personal conduct.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with person involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions, concealments, and falsifications. Applicant claimed he made the statement 
that “there were no UCMJ violations” because he was told by his security representative 
to disclose only what was listed on his DD Form 214. There is no corroborating 
evidence to support his statement. Even if Applicant believed he was only required to 
list what was on his DD Form 214, he failed to correctly list the type of discharge he 
received. He listed that he received an “honorable” discharge, which was not true. I do 
not find his omissions, concealments, and falsifications were caused or contributed to 
by improper or inadequate advice. Applicant did not correct his omissions before he was 
confronted by the OPM investigator. Instead, he continued to provide misleading 
information to the investigator. The omissions, concealments, and falsifications are 
serious because Applicant was attempting to mislead the Government about the larceny 
charges that were pending at a general court-martial when he was in the Army. He was 
attempting to mislead the Government when he stated he had no UCMJ charges. He 
was attempting to mislead the Government by failing to disclose he was cited for 
marijuana possession. He intentionally misled the Government when he listed on his 
SCA that he received an “honorable” discharge, when in fact he was discharged from 
the Army in lieu of a trial by court-martial and received a “general discharge under 
honorable conditions.” His testimony at his hearing was inconsistent, evasive, and not 
credible. I find AG ¶¶ 17 (a) and 17(b) do not apply.  
 
Applicant’s past conduct while in the military and after his discharge is a cause of 
concern. Each incident he has been involved in he has attributed to someone else. He 
denies involvement in a car accident, despite statements to the contrary. He indicated in 
his statement to the OPM investigator that he had no UCMJ offenses. His statements 
 
10 
 
 
made to CID that he did not know he did not have authorization to use someone else’s 
credit card are not believable. He pled guilty to breaking and entering, but blamed the 
crime on his roommate. He picked up the wrong coat that had marijuana in it. He did not 
read the directions when he answered the question inquiring into past drug-related 
offenses. He was “totally misinformed” and had a “lack of intelligence” when he listed he 
received an “honorable discharge” instead of a “general discharge under honorable 
conditions.” Applicant has a pattern of being untruthful. His offenses are not minor and 
his false testimony regarding that conduct is a matter of grave concern. I find that his 
actions did not happen under unique circumstances, but rather as a result of his 
deliberate actions. I find Applicant’s course of conduct casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Applicant has not acknowledged his behavior 
or taken positive steps to convince me that the inappropriate behavior is unlikely to 
recur or that he has taken actions to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. I find AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) do not apply. There is 
some evidence that Applicant no longer associates with persons involved in criminal 
activity. I find AG ¶ 17(g) has limited application. I find the facts do not support 
application of AG ¶¶ 17(f). 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern for criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was involved in serious criminal activity while in the Army, resulting in 
larceny charges and his discharge in lieu of a trial by general court-martial. After his 
discharge, he pled guilty to breaking and entering. He was cited in 2005 for marijuana 
possession. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
11 
 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant was involved in serious criminal activity while in the Army. He pled 
guilty to breaking and entering in 2000. He was cited in 2005 for possession of 
marijuana. It has been over five years since Applicant’s last criminal activity. There is 
evidence that Applicant has furthered his education, works in the community, and 
seems to do well at his job, which reflects positively that there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. I find AG ¶ 32 (d) applies. Applicant failed to provide honest information 
on his SCA, to the OPM investigator, and at his hearing. His conduct continues to be a 
security concern and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. I find 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was discharged in lieu of a trial by general court-martial due to larceny 
charges. He pled guilty to breaking and entering in 2000. He was arrested for 
possession of marijuana in 2005. Applicant has earned an associate’s, bachelor’s, and 
master’s degrees. He is involved in his community and has done well at his job. 
However, the concern is that Applicant repeatedly provided false or misleading 
information to the Government. He failed to be honest about the type of discharge he 
received from the Army on his SCA. His testimony was not believable. He misled the 
 
12 
 
 
OPM investigator by providing false and misleading statements and he failed to disclose 
that he was cited for possession of marijuana. His explanations were not credible. 
Applicant has taken important steps in rehabilitating his life, but his attempts to hide his 
past and his failure to be honest throughout the security clearance process, including 
his hearing, diminish any persuasive weight that those facts may normally be given. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
