1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-00183
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties, which are ongoing. Applicant
failed to present sufficient evidence to overcome the security concerns raised by his
history of financial problems. He did not give deliberately false answers to questions
about his finances in 2008, when he completed a security clearance application.
Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which are identified as exhibits in this decision.  
 Exhibit 5. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 24,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E for personal conduct.
The SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge to
decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On or about June 10, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case consisting of
all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called3
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, but not received by him. It was
again mailed to Applicant on or about October 14, 2010, and received by him on or
about November 15, 2010. He then had a 30-day period to submit a response setting
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. To date, he has not
replied. The case was assigned to me January 11, 2011.  
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married for the
first time in 2006. He completed a security clearance application in July 2008.  In the4
application, he reported his then employment as a tool-control manger. He changed
jobs in about December 2008, when he began his current employment as a quality
 Exhibit 7 at 7. 5
 Answer to SOR; Exhibits 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 13.6
 Answer to SOR. 7
3
engineer.  He reported two periods of unemployment. The first occurred during August5
2000 to November 2001. The second occurred during December 2006 to March 2007.
In addition, his employment history includes military service in the U.S. Air Force
Reserve for several years ending in about 2007. 
Applicant was required to provide answers to various questions about his
background when he completed the security clearance application. Those questions
included inquiries about his financial record and financial delinquencies. In response to
a question about having been over 180 days delinquent on any debts in the last seven
years, he answered “yes,” and he reported two delinquent auto loans. He denied
currently having any debts more than 90 days delinquent in response to another
question. In his Answer to the SOR, he denied providing deliberately false answers to
these questions, explaining that he had no idea what he owed. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties that he does not
dispute.  In his Answer to the SOR, he attributed the financial problems to youthful6
immaturity and inexperience with credit. He explained the origin of his financial
problems and his efforts to resolve them as follows:
I in no way live out of my means now. When I was younger I was totally
inexperienced with credit and did not think about consequences on my
actions. I was making a lot of money at a very young age and did not take
into consideration that it may not last. The income did not last and I was
not able to pay for the items I acquired with credit. Now I am much more
mature. I have been through experiences and learned a great deal. I know
what it is like to have no job and no income for a period of time. I have
matured and realize how important paying things off is if I want to have a
nice future for myself and my family. I started a good paying job in
December 2008 and have been paying off large debts that I acquired
when I was 20–22 years old. I have been working on this for the last year
and three months. I could not do this in the past due to starting an entry
position job and paying bills like electric, oil for heat, rent, and serious
needs. I now make much more and focus all of my ‘extra’ funds on
satisfying my debts. I have not acquired any new debts. I still have debts
in which I am currently paying off. I have worked on the larger debts and
once I get a smaller amount owed I plan on going to a bank for a loan in
which I will pay off all remaining debts. This will help me build my credit
back up while making one manageable payment a month. I realize that the
interest rate will be high but I need to start somewhere to clean my slate
and make my credit better in my adult life.   7
 Exhibit 13. 8
 E.g., Exhibit 7. 9
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to10
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
4
In addition, Applicant attributes some of his financial problems or difficulties to the 2005
period, when he was deployed overseas with the Air Force and left bill paying to his
then girlfriend, who made only partial payments on an auto loan, resulting in
repossession.   8
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts ranging in amounts from $37 to $3,054 for
a total of approximately $19,500. The debts consist of collection or charged-off
accounts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the debts except for the debt
in ¶ 1.j, which he denied, asserting it had been paid. In addition, he stated that he had
one remaining payment to make on the debt in ¶ 1.k. He also claimed to have paid eight
accounts for approximately $46,490, although he did not include documentary proof to
support his claim. 
Applicant has presented proof of payment for debts not alleged in the SOR.  But9
he has not presented any documentary evidence of efforts to repay, settle, or otherwise
resolve the delinquent debts in the SOR. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As10
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt11
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 18
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).19
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.20
5
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  13
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting14
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An15
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate16
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme17
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.18
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it20
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the suitability of an applicant may be
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
 AG ¶ 15. 21
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 22
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an23
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  24
6
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  21
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the
information did not need to be reported. 
The issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s answers to two questions about
his financial delinquencies on the 2008 security clearance application. Rather than
analyze each question and answer individually, it is appropriate to consider them
together and analyze them based on the evidence as a whole. In doing so, the evidence
shows Applicant reported two delinquent auto loans, but otherwise answered the
questions incorrectly as he failed to report the matters called for by the questions. He
has explained that he did so because he was unaware of what he then owed. His
explanation is not implausible and is generally consistent with an individual who is not in
control of his finances. I am persuaded that he did not have complete knowledge of his
financial situation and this shortcoming resulted in his incorrect, but not deliberately
false, answers to the questions. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided for Applicant. 
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant22
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline23
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  24
 AG ¶ 19(a).  25
 AG ¶ 19(c). 26
 AG ¶ 19(e). 27
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f). 28
7
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties, which are ongoing. This history raises security concerns
because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not25
meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient26
to establish these two disqualifying conditions. In addition, by his own admission,
Applicant engaged in a practice or pattern of consistent spending beyond his means.27
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:28
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d). Each is
discussed below. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).29
8
Under ¶ 20(b), it is probable that Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in
part, by his girlfriend’s problematic bill paying in 2005 as well as his relatively brief
period (four months) of unemployment during 2006–2007. These were circumstances
largely beyond his control. This is difficult to measure, however, because the
circumstances took place some years ago. Accordingly, this mitigating condition has
limited applicability. 
Under ¶ 20(d), Applicant has made some progress in repaying debts and
provided documentation to that end. Also, Applicant has a plan to resolve the remaining
indebtedness by obtaining a bank loan. This plan is unrealistic, however, because it is
unlikely that a loan officer at a bank or credit union would approve a debt-consolidation
loan (unsecured, presumably) given Applicant’s negative credit history. Lacking a
realistic plan, as well as any measurable progress in working a plan, this mitigating
condition has limited applicability. 
To conclude, the evidence of Applicant’s financial problems, past and present,
justifies current doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following
Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting
national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant did not29
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. At this
point, Applicant’s suitability or fitness for a security clearance is a work in progress.
Time will tell if Applicant has both the ability and willingness to resolve his financial
problems. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.s: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
