                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06652 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 In an undated response to the SOR, Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 3, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
January 25, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant did not 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness testified on her behalf. She 
offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objections. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 31, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, with explanations, 
and denied the remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. She is a single mother with two children, ages six and 
three years old. She graduated from high school in 2001. She earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 2005. She began attending graduate school in 2008, to earn a dual master’s 
degree. She has completed approximately half of the course requirements.1  
 
 Applicant was granted a Secret security clearance in approximately 2007. Upon 
the request of her employer, she was sponsored for a Top Secret security clearance 
with access to Sensitive Compartmented Information. It was during the course of her 
Top Secret background investigation that the government agency became aware of the 
issues that are the subject of this case.  
 
 On March 5, 2007, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
Section 22 requested she provide information regarding her employment, including if 
she had been fired, terminated, left by mutual agreement, or under any other 
unfavorable circumstances. Applicant answered “no.” Section 24 requested she provide 
information about past use of illegal drugs or drug activity, including if she had used 
illegal drugs since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, whichever was shorter. 
Applicant answered “no.” During a security interview by another government agency in 
April 2007, Applicant stated she never used, possessed, or transported illegal drugs in 
her lifetime. She admitted at her hearing that she made the statement and she said it 
because she wanted to keep her job.2 
 
 Pursuant to the direction of a United States government agency, Applicant was 
required to submit to a polygraph examination in July 2007. During the examination, 
Applicant admitted she used marijuana while in college on numerous occasions from 
2001 to 2005. She used it approximately eight times in July and August 2006, and on 
New Year’s Eve 2006.3  
 
 During the July 2007 polygraph, Applicant also disclosed that on two occasions 
her live-in boyfriend stored marijuana at her house and she passed the marijuana to her 
boyfriend’s cousin twice between March and May 2007. At her hearing, Applicant stated 
1 Tr. 26-28. 
 
2 Tr. 43-44. 
 
3 Tr. 44. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
that both times her boyfriend stored marijuana in their home she was unaware it was 
present. She stated her boyfriend called her on the telephone and told her his cousin 
would be coming over to the house and she was to give him a bag. She stated she 
looked in the bag and saw it was marijuana. She told him not to store marijuana in the 
house. She also stated that at times she used marijuana with her boyfriend in their 
home, but the children were not present. She stated that her boyfriend was a frequent 
marijuana user and used it in their home, but not when the children were present.4 In 
her sworn affidavit dated January 30, 2009, she stated: 
 
In approximately August or September 2006, my ex-boyfriend, [X], left a 
couple small bags (exact amount unknown) of marijuana at my house for 
[X’s] cousin, [Y] (last name unrecalled) to pick up. When [Y] arrived at my 
home, I was the only one present. I only directed [Y] (last name 
unrecalled) to the location in [the] house to retrieve [the] marijuana. There 
was no exchange of money and I did not actually handle the marijuana.5  
 
I find Applicant’s testimony was not credible and she knowingly passed 
marijuana that was stored in her home on two occasions to her boyfriend’s cousin. 
 
 Applicant admitted that she believed if she admitted her past drug use on her 
SCA or during her interview it would impact her job. She was focused on her job and 
concerned about it and providing for her children. She admitted she had no excuse and 
she made a mistake.6  
 
 Applicant was terminated from her employment in 2002 or 2003 because her 
employer told her she could not be trusted. Applicant explained that the reason she did 
not disclose that she was terminated from her job was because she forgot about the 
incident. She stated she did not intentionally fail to disclose the information, rather she 
simply forgot about it, and it was a mistake. She stated she was pregnant at the time 
and was experiencing stress and worked in a stressful environment. She stated she did 
disclose the information at her first polygraph in July 2007.7 
 
In February 2008, Applicant was notified that another government agency 
disapproved her access to classified information due to her drug involvement and 
personal conduct. The reasons included Applicant’s lack of candor during security 
processing.8  
 
4 Tr. 30-42. 
 
5 GE 2, 6. 
 
6 Tr. 42-43. 
 
7 Tr. 22-23, 29-30, 47. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
On Applicant’s SCA dated October 8, 2008, under Section 24, Applicant listed 
her marijuana use during the past seven years from “09/2001 (Estimated) to 01/2007” 
and “approximately 10” times.9  
 
In Applicant’s sworn affidavit dated January 30, 2009, she denied using 
marijuana at all during 2004, 2005, and most of 2006. At her hearing, Applicant stated 
she experimented with marijuana in high school in 1997 or 1998. She used it once a 
month in college from 2001 to 2005, and used it three to four times in 2006. She 
disputed she told the polygrapher in 2007 that she used marijuana on New Year’s Eve 
2006, but rather she believes she passively ingested it because she was around people 
who were smoking marijuana that night. She stated she was pregnant at the time and 
would not have smoked marijuana that evening. She also stated that she did not use it 
in 2004, because she was pregnant and her social circle changed. Applicant’s 
statements are inconsistent and not credible.10  
 
 On Applicant’s October 8, 2008 SCA she did not disclose that she was 
terminated from a job. She did not know why she failed to disclose this information. She 
believed it was because she was in a rush to complete the SCA and she missed it.11  
 
 I find Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose on her March 2007 
SCA that she was terminated from a job and information about her past illegal drug use. 
I find she also intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose her job termination on her 
October 2008 SCA. I find she falsified material facts during an April 2007 security 
interview with a government agency in that she stated she never used, possessed, or 
transported illegal drugs in her lifetime. I find her January 30, 2009 affidavit is 
inconsistent with other statements she made about her marijuana use. I find she was 
deliberately trying to minimize her drug involvement and she deliberately provided false 
information. I find she deliberately provided misleading and inconsistent statement 
about her awareness and involvement in passing marijuana to her boyfriend’s cousin.  
 
 Applicant no longer associates with her ex-boyfriend, except on a limited basis 
when dealing with their children. She considers herself a trustworthy person and she is 
trying to rectify her past. She does not plan to ever use illegal drugs again. She is aware 
that she made a mistake when she failed to disclose her marijuana use and 
employment termination on the SCA. However, she believes she fully disclosed all of 
the information during her polygraph. 
 
 Applicant’s character witness provided testimony on her behalf. She has known 
Applicant for ten years. She has dated Applicant’s father for over a decade. She 
believes Applicant is a trustworthy person, who has turned her life around. She and 
9 GE 3, 6. 
 
10 Tr. 24, 45-48. 
 
11 Tr. 53-56. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant babysit each other’s children, so she trusts her. She has never heard or seen 
her do anything untrustworthy.12  
 
 Applicant provided character letters that I have considered. The letters indicated 
that Applicant is considered a hardworking, goal-oriented, sweet, dedicated person. She 
is a good mother and takes good care of her children physically and financially. She 
surrounds herself with positive people and good role models. She is trustworthy.13 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
12 Tr. 56-60; AE B. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberating providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose relevant facts on her March 5, 2007 and 
October 8, 2008 SCA, during her security interview, and in affidavit presented to an 
investigator for the Department of Defense. Applicant was terminated from employment 
 
7 
 
 
because her employer could not trust her. Applicant was aware her live-in boyfriend had 
marijuana in her home in 2006 and 2007, and she passed it to her boyfriend’s cousin on 
two occasions. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant’s personal 
conduct and false statements.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with person involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct her 
falsification. Applicant failed to disclose relevant information when she first applied for a 
security clearance in March 2007. She was interviewed approximately a month later and 
again failed to disclose relevant information and provided false information during the 
security interview. After being granted a Secret security clearance, her employer later 
sponsored her for a Top Secret security clearance. She completed a new SCA on 
 
8 
 
 
October 8, 2008. She again intentionally failed to disclose relevant information. In an 
affidavit she provided to an authorized investigator for the Department of Defense on 
January 30, 2009, she provided misleading and false information. Her testimony at her 
hearing was not credible. Applicant did not make an effort to correct her omissions, 
falsifications or concealments about her illegal drug use or her termination from a job, 
until she was subjected to a polygraph. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant was provided with improper or inadequate advice 
concerning the security clearance process. AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. Applicant’s 
falsifications are felony violations under Title 18 U.S.C. § 1001. They are not minor or 
infrequent. They did not happen under unique circumstances and they are recent. I find 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. Applicant admitted she made mistakes, but she has not 
really acknowledged the gravity of the pattern of her falsifications. She has not obtained 
counseling or taken other positive steps to show her behavior is unlikely to recur or to 
reduce vulnerability, exploitation, duress or manipulation. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do not 
apply. Applicant stated she has minimal contact with the father of her children. I find AG 
¶ 17(g) marginally applies.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
Applicant failed to disclose and falsified her past drug involvement and failed to 
disclose a job termination in two SCAs, during a security interview, and in a sworn 
affidavit. Her omissions and falsifications were intentional and deliberate in violation of 
Title 18 United States Code § 1001. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
9 
 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Applicant repeatedly omitted, concealed, and falsified relevant information from 
her SCAs, during a security interview, and in a sworn affidavit. Her behavior occurred 
from March 2007 to January 2009. Her testimony at her hearing lacked candor and was 
not credible. Applicant did not disclose her past drug use until she was subjected to a 
polygraph. She has provided inconsistent statements. Her pattern of false statements 
and her attempt to minimize her behavior cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Although she appears to have a good employment record, her 
repeated behavior in concealing her past conduct and her repeated failure to be truthful 
during the security clearance process is a serious concern. I find there is insufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant is successfully rehabilitated. There is no evidence she 
was coerced, pressured, or did not commit the offenses. I find none of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
10 
 
 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a single mother of two children. She is a college graduate and is attending 
school to obtain a master’s degree. She provided letters describing her as a good 
worker. Applicant failed to provide relevant information about her drug use and job 
termination on her March 2007 SCA. She provided false information in April 2007 when 
she was interviewed by an investigator. It was not until she was subjected to a 
polygraph that she admitted her past drug involvement. In her 2008 SCA, she again 
failed to disclose that she was terminated from a job. In her affidavit to an authorized 
investigator, she deliberately failed to accurately disclose her prior drug use and her 
involvement in transferring illegal drugs to her boyfriend’s cousin. Applicant’s repeated 
behavior creates serious doubts as to her reliability, good judgment, and 
trustworthiness. Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for Personal Conduct and 
Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
