 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07689 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations or criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance or access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories pertaining to his subject 
interview. He responded to the interrogatories on February 4, 2010.2 On another 
unspecified date, DOHA issued him another set of interrogatories pertaining to his 
financial situation. He responded to the interrogatories on February 4, 2010.3 On June 
1 Item 5 (SF 86), dated July 27, 2009. 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 4, 2010). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
29, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 
1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 3, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, dated August 16, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on 
September 14, 2010, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days 
after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on September 22, 2010, and 
elected not to make any additional submissions. The case was assigned to me on 
November 19, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.p. of the SOR, as well as the 
factual allegation pertaining to criminal conduct in ¶ 2.a. of the SOR. Those admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He did not answer ¶ 1.q. 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a “contractor” with a nationwide trucking company based at home.4 He has never 
married.5 He has not served in the U.S. military.6 From January 2000 until June 2003, 
Applicant was employed by a construction company as a commercial roofer,7 and from 
June 2003 until December 2006, he was employed by another construction company in 
a similar position.8 In December 2006, he was laid off, initially due to the weather, and 
 
3 Item 7 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 4, 2010). 
 
4 Item 5, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
5 Id. at 27. 
 
6 Id. at 24. 
 
7 Id. at 20-21. 
 
8 Id. at 19-20. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
remained unemployed until February 2008.9 He held positions with different nationwide 
trucking companies from February 2008 until April 2009, when he assumed his position 
with his current employer. During that same period, Applicant also was unemployed or 
underemployed from September 2008 until December 2008.10  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2003-2004. On 
July 30, 2004, Applicant filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy under the provisions of 
Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.11 He cited $5,960 in assets and $33,486.48 in 
liabilities.12 Among his assets were two secured loans for vehicles identified as a 1977 
Mercury Cougar and a 1993 Ford Ranger.13 Among his liabilities were resort fees and 
two repossessed vehicles, described as a 1990 Geo Metro and a 2001 Dodge Neon.14 
Under the bankruptcy, he agreed to surrender the 1993 Ford Ranger.15 Applicant’s 
liabilities were discharged on November 24, 2004.16 Applicant eventually attributed his 
financial problems during that period to his youthful financial irresponsibility and fiscal 
mismanagement.17 
 
At some unspecified point in 2006, accounts started to again become 
delinquent.18 His financial difficulties were exacerbated when he was laid off in 
December 2006. As a result, because of a slow-down in the roofing business, his 
decreased income, and his inability to make monthly payments, some of the accounts 
were placed for collection with a variety of collection agents, and some of the accounts 
were charged off. One delinquent account went to judgment. 
 
The SOR identified 15 continuing delinquencies as reflected by credit reports 
from 200919 and 2010,20 totaling approximately $21,484 (not including the entire 
 
9 Id. at 19. 
 
10 Id. at 17. 
 
11 Item 11 (Bankruptcy Petition, dated July 30, 2004), at 2, and (Case Summary, dated September 8, 2010). 
 
12 Id. at 3. 
 
13 Id. at 7-9. 
 
14 Id. at 11-12. Applicant subsequently corrected his descriptions of the two vehicles as a 1990 Ford 
Mustang and a 2001 Plymouth Neon. See Personal Subject Interview, dated August 20, 2009), at 1, attached to Item 
6, supra note 2. 
 
15 Item 11, supra note 11, at 26. 
 
16 Discharge of Debtor in a Chapter 7 Case, dated November 24, 2004, at 1, attached to Item 11, supra note 
11. 
 
17 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 14, at 1. 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Item 10 (Combined Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 31, 2009). 
 
4 
                                      
 
ments. 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
$71,200 balance of a mortgage loan which is in a foreclosure status). Among the 
delinquencies are accounts pertaining to medical providers, a home mortgage loan, 
utility service, credit cards, and truck driving school. Some accounts have been 
transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts 
are referenced repeatedly in different credit reports, in many instances duplicating other 
accounts listed, either under the same creditor name or under a different creditor name. 
Some accounts are identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified 
by partial account numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits, and in 
others eliminating other digits.  
 
In August 2009, while being interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant indicated he had made only one limited 
attempt to enter into negotiations with one of his SOR creditors in an effort to resolve his 
delinquent accounts.21 That one effort was an account with a truck driving school, and 
Applicant contacted the creditor and arranged a repayment plan under which he made 
only one $150 payment in May 2009.22 No additional payments were made through 
August 2009,23 although Applicant contends he is making current payments.24 In 
August 2009, he stated that he would establish payment plans with his creditors “when 
money is available.”25 In February 2010, Applicant stated he would obtain the services 
of a debt consolidator and start addressing his delinquent accounts during February 
2010 through April 2010.26 To date, Applicant has produced no evidence to indicate that 
he has contacted his remaining creditors, established repayment plans, or commenced 
making any other pay
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant ever received financial counseling covering 
such topics as debt consolidation, money management, repayment plans, or budgeting.  
 
 Applicant did not submit a personal financial statement, indicating a monthly net 
income, monthly living expenses, or a monthly net remainder, if any, available for 
discretionary spending.  
 
 
 
20 Item 9 (Equifax Credit Report, dated March 11, 2010); Item 8 (Equifax Credit Report, dated May 24, 
2010). 
 
21 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 14, at 3. 
 
22 Id.  
 
23 Id. 
 
24 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 16, 2010) at 2. 
 
25 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 14, at 1-4. 
 
26 Item 7, supra note 3, at 2-5. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
rminated his 
mployment.   
 
 father 
resumed a close relationship and Applicant moved back into his parents’ home. 
Policies 
ion “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”35   
              
Criminal Conduct 
 
 At some point during his lengthy period of unemployment (December 2006 – 
February 2008), Applicant sought to reduce his expenses and moved into his parents’ 
residence where he was welcomed without reservation. In September 2007, at the age 
of 30, Applicant wrote checks totaling $500 - $600 on his father’s checking account, 
without the knowledge or permission of his father.27 They subsequently had a dispute 
and Applicant moved out of the house. Applicant’s father filed felony theft charges 
against Applicant and warrants were issued for Applicant’s arrest.28 When Applicant 
and his father repaired their relationship in March 2008, his father told him about the 
criminal complaint. Applicant was not aware that warrants had been issued, and in 
August 2008, during a traffic stop, he was arrested on the outstanding warrants.29 
Because of the nature of the charge, Applicant’s employer te
30e
When Applicant appeared in court, his father told the judge he did not wish to 
continue the charge against his son. Consequently, the charge was reduced to a 
misdemeanor charge of attempted forgery.31 Applicant was convicted of the reduced 
charge and sentenced to 50 hours of community service, two years probation, and a 
fine and court costs.32 Applicant satisfied his court-ordered obligations. He 
acknowledged his actions were “a very stupid mistake.”33 Applicant and his
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”34 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified informat
                                            
27 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 14, at 4. 
 Id. 
 Id. 
 Id. 
 Id. 
 Id. 
 Id. 
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
28
 
29
 
30
 
31
 
32
 
33
 
34
 
35 Exec
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”36 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.37  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”38 
 
 
ntilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. W shington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994). 
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
36 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a sci
tha
 
37
 
38
 
 
7 
                                      
 
that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences groun re speculation or conjecture. 
alysis 
 
Guide
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in A
 
assified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
bility or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
securit
ts remained unaddressed by him after he secured his current employment in 
                                                          
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”39 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions 
ded on me
 
An
line F, Financial Considerations 
 
G ¶ 18:       
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect cl
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Aina
y concerns.  
 
As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 
2003 – 2004. At some unspecified point, he failed to keep up with his monthly 
payments, and accounts started to become delinquent. Some accounts were placed for 
collection and some accounts were charged off. Applicant attributed his financial 
situation during that period to youthful financial irresponsibility and fiscal 
mismanagement. In 2004, his debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code. Two years later, financial problems reoccurred, this time associated 
with lengthy periods of unemployment (December 2006 – February 2008) and 
underemployment (September 2008 – December 2008). Once again, he failed to keep 
up with his monthly payments, and accounts started to become delinquent. Some 
accounts were placed for collection and some accounts were charged off. Applicant 
attributed his financial situation during that period to insufficient money arising from his 
unemployment. Nevertheless, the record is silent as to why Applicant’s delinquent 
accoun
39 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
April 2
hat the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe in
n is frequent and continuing in nature, and the continuing causation 
is not adequately described, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s handling of his 
finance
e delinquent. 
Moreover, sufficient time has passed since he generated his latest bills and obtained 
employ
 he acted “responsibly under the circumstances.”  
                                                          
009, and he did not start paying off his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications t
dividual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@40  
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced in 2003 – 2004, disappeared in 2004 
when his debts were discharged in bankruptcy, reappeared in 2006, and still have not 
been resolved. While he attributed his continuing financial difficulties initially to youthful 
financial irresponsibility and fiscal mismanagement, and subsequently to unemployment 
and underemployment, he never explained why he failed to resolve or even address 
nearly all of his delinquent accounts after he became employed in April 2009. Because 
the financial situatio
s, under the circumstances, casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because his relatively lengthy periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. Applicant had no debts following his 2004 
bankruptcy, yet he still managed to incur additional debt which becam
ment, and he still has not addressed his delinquent accounts. The reasons 
stated do not establish
40 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
agencies that they have agreed to his proposed terms, or to confirm that such 
 of such documentation, most of the evidence consists 
f promises to pay or unsupported contentions that some creditors may have been paid. 
riminal Conduct 
ut in 
AG ¶ 3
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
stop. While his father subsequently 
intervened on his behalf, and persuaded the court to reduce the charge to misdemeanor 
attemp
 evidence of successful 
rehabilitation: including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
crimina
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant received 
financial counseling.  
 
Applicant receives very limited application of AG ¶ 20(d) because, with one 
exception, he failed to address his delinquent accounts. The vast majority of them 
remain unpaid or unresolved, and while there are some indications that he intends to 
repay those delinquent debts eventually, as well as some indications that some debts 
may have been paid, partially or otherwise, he has offered no documentation to indicate 
the terms of his repayment agreements, or any indication from the various collection 
agreements exist. In the absence
o
 
Guideline J, C
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set o
0:       
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), an Aallegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,@ may raise security concerns. As noted above, Applicant was charged with 
felony theft because of his actions in September 2007 in forging his father’s signature to 
$500 - $600 worth of checks. A warrant for his arrest was issued, but he was not 
arrested until August 2008, during a traffic 
ted forgery, the underlying criminal conduct remains unchallenged. Accordingly, 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where “there is
l activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
Applicant receives partial application of AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) because nearly 
three and one-half years have elapsed since the criminal conduct occurred in 
 
10 
                                      
 
tence, the record is silent as to other possible 
vidence of rehabilitation. Applicant has offered minimal evidence of remorse or 
ment record (such as an evaluation of his performance), or 
onstructive community involvement.  
ministrative judge must evaluate an 
pplicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduc nine 
adjudic
 
 absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearan
 of 
need for his services. As a result, he was unemployed and underemployed for extensive 
period
September 2007. It is difficult to conclude that such criminal conduct happened under 
“such unusual circumstances” that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
[Applicant’s] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” While the economic realities 
may have caused Applicant financial difficulties, many individuals have been similarly 
impacted without resorting to criminal conduct. Applicant chose to handle his financial 
difficulties in a less-than-honorable manner by disrupting his familial relationship and 
stealing from his father. Applicant’s criminal acts, accomplished when he was 30 years 
old, clearly cast substantial doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Likewise, while there is no evidence of recurrence of criminal conduct since September 
2007, other than the passage of time, employment as a government contractor, and the 
completion of the court-imposed sen
e
restitution, a good employ
c
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the ad
a
t and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
ative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
ce must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He was directly 
impacted by a sustained period of national economic recession resulting in a lack
s of time. Nevertheless, after obtaining new employment, the resolution of the vast 
majority of his accounts remain goals without specified details or specific milestones. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. He failed to address his current 
financial responsibilities, and simply referred to his unemployment and 
underemployment to explain his financial difficulties. As noted above, the record is silent 
as to why Applicant’s delinquent accounts remained unaddressed by him after he 
secured his current employment in April 2009, or why he did not start paying off his 
 
11 
                                      
 
e various aspects of this case in light of the 
totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.41 
His limited good-faith efforts are i ate continuing security concerns. 
ee AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 the SOR, 
s required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
agraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
uideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
t to rant pplic t elig r a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for acce nied. 
 
                                   
                                                          
delinquent debts. Moreover, he was welcomed into his parents’ home during his period 
of financial stress, and he stole from his father. Applicant’s check-forging escapade and 
the period of inaction reflect traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. I have evaluated th
nsufficient to mitig
S
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in
a
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subpar
 Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, G
   
Conclusion 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interes  g A an ibility fo
ss to classified information is de
                  
41 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
