The Government submitted twelve items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-07012
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in
September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, admitting six of eight delinquent debts, and
requested an administrative determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of
Relevant Material (FORM), dated December 9, 2010.  Applicant received the FORM on1
December 16, 2010, but did not submit a response to the FORM. On January 31, 2011,
the Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. I
2
received the case assignment on February 1, 2011. Based on a review of the case file,
submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden regarding the
security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). She denied all allegations under Guideline E
(Personal Conduct).
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
high school in 1982 and received her undergraduate degree in1986. Applicant is
married and has one child. She has served as an active US. Navy reservist since 2001,
and has held a security clearance since 2003. She has worked for her current employer
since March 2007. (Item 5)
Financial
The SOR lists delinquent accounts, including a 2009 judgment, collection
accounts and voluntary repossessions, totaling $46,813. Applicant admitted six of the
delinquent debts and the credit reports confirm them. (Items 7-9)
In May 1992, Applicant filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. The bankruptcy
was discharged in May 1992. (Item 12) There is no information in the record as to the
origin of the debts or the circumstances surrounding the bankruptcy. Applicant
acknowledges the bankruptcy, but notes that it is not “on her credit” and was 18 years
ago. (Item 11)
After Applicant’s bankruptcy discharge in 1992, she filed another bankruptcy in
February 1998 for $73,000.(Item 11) There is no information in the record as to the
origin of the debts or the circumstances surrounding the bankruptcy.
Applicant noted in her response to the SOR that she failed to live within her
means and satisfy debts and obligations, but she blamed it on her husband’s seasonal
employment and the general economic climate. Applicant did not provide any details
about her husband’s business. She noted that she is now moving closer to removing
some debts and is current with her daily expenses. She also admitted that she has
been  employed full time since March 2007. (Item 4) 
Applicant claims that she is in repayment status for the debts alleged in the SOR
but did not submit evidence of her regular payment plans or receipts for payment
except for one. She claims that the judgment ($12,039) alleged in SOR 1.a is the result
of a voluntary repossession of a vehicle that was used in her husband’s business. She
advises that she is paying $75 a month to satisfy the debt and believes her balance is
approximately $9,900. She also notes that this is a duplicate of the debts alleged in
SOR 1.c and 1.f. She has officially disputed the account in 1.c as noted on her 2010
credit report. (Item 7) In addition, the account in 1.f has been sold or transferred to
3
another company. It appears that is possible that the accounts could be duplicates, but
Applicant has not provided documentation to support the claim. 
Applicant states that the debt alleged in SOR 1.b is paid and was the result of a
health-related accident. She stated that she did not know about the debt prior to seeing
the credit report. She submitted a receipt, dated September 7, 2010, for this debt of
$402. (Item 4) Her most recent credit report shows that the account is paid. (Item 7)
The debt alleged in SOR 1.d for a credit card is in a monthly repayment status of
$57.60, and that she began paying on September 15, 2010. However, Applicant did not
submit any documentation. 
Applicant explained that she is indebted for another voluntary repossession
when she and her husband were “self employed” in a lawn care business. His customer
base changes each year and the income is not predictable. She claims that she is
repaying the debt ($50 a month) for this debt in SOR 1.e.
Applicant’s 2010 monthly net income was $3,313, which includes her husband’s
income of $1,500. After monthly expenses, there is a net remainder of $850 in
disposable income. She did not provide any evidence of financial counseling.   
Personal Conduct
Applicant completed her security clearance application in May 2007. She
answered “No” to section 28 concerning her financial indebtedness in the last seven
years. She states that she did not intentionally mislead the government about any
delinquent debts that were 90 or 180 days delinquent. She elaborated that she
misunderstood the question believing that her voluntary vehicle repossessions were not
considered delinquent debts.  It also appears from the credit report that some payments
were made on her vehicle as late as 2007.
When Applicant completed the security clearance on May 16, 2007, she could
not have reported the judgment alleged in 2009 (SOR 1.a) because it had not yet
occurred. The 2007 credit report in the record shows the majority of accounts “pays as
agreed.” It does not list the account alleged in SOR 1.d. In fact the only account that
Applicant shows on the 2007 credit report is the repossession alleged in SOR 1.e. This
lends credence to her belief that she had nothing to report in section 28. I find that
Applicant omitted information but did not intentionally falsify her security clearance
application. Omission alone is not sufficient for the Government to prove this
controverted fact.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
4
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is2
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion3
is on the applicant.  4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
 Id.      7
5
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.” It also states that “an individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant admitted that she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1992 and 1998. She
acknowledged that she currently has delinquent debts that have not been paid and are
ongoing. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against her and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant had a fresh start in 1999 after filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She was
employed from 2000 until 2006 with a company. She again encountered financial
problems in 2006. She still has unresolved debts. Also, she has not provided
information concerning resolution of the debts. She admits that she has not lived within
her means. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant did not provide details about her self-employment with her
husband’s business in 2006 and 2007 and how it impacted her finances. After that she
was steadily employed on a full-time basis. This may have exacerbated Applicant’s
ability to meet her obligations, but she has not provided any information that she
6
immediately addressed her debts. She has not provided information about an income
reduction in employment due to seasonal business. She did not provide specifics or a
nexus to the current financial problems. These events, no doubt, impacted her finances.
However, there is no evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. She
allowed the delinquent debts to remain unpaid until 2010. There is no record of any
attempts to resolve her debt until after she received the SOR. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has not provided
evidence of any consistent payment plans. She asserts that she entered a repayment
plan but has not provided documentation to support this claim. She has paid the
medical account in SOR 1.b. in September 2010. Her failure to provide information
about financial counseling obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control).
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 16(a), a disqualifying conditions exists when there is
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Under AG ¶ 16(b) a disqualifying condition exists when “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”
Applicant answered “No” to question 28 concerning any delinquencies in the past
seven years. As noted, certain debts had not yet occurred when she completed the May
16, 2007 security clearance application. She believed that her voluntary repossession
did not count as a delinquent debt. She explained her confusion about the vehicle that
was used in conjunction with her husband’s business.  Although she omitted material
information, I do not find against Applicant under personal conduct.  
. Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
7
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is 46 years old. She has served as a Navy reservist since 2001 and
has held a security clearance. She has had financial difficulties in the past and filed for
bankruptcy which is a legal means to resolve debt. However, after 1998, Applicant had
a fresh start. She did not fully explain how the self employment and her husband’s lawn
care business impacted on her finances. Part of her financial difficulties stem from that
time in 2006, but there are not sufficient facts to determine a nexus between then and
her current financial problems. She also did not provide sufficient documentation about
her payments or repayment plans except the medical account. This was paid in
September 2010.
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient information or
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her
circumstances, articulate her position, and carry her burden in this process. She failed
to offer evidence of financial counseling. She failed to provide documentation regarding
actual payments. I do find her reasons and explanations credible for the allegation
concerning falsification of her security clearance.. Accordingly, Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns under the personal conduct. She has not mitigate the concern
under the financial considerations guideline. Clearance is denied. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2., Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
