                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-06390 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 15, 2009. On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 
1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2010 and provided a supplemental 
answer on April 12, 2010. He elected to have his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 
15, 2010, was provided to him by cover letter dated June 16, 2010. Applicant received 
his copy of the FORM on June 29, 2010. He was given 30 days from the date he 
received the FORM to submit any objections, and information in mitigation or 
extenuation. He did not submit additional information within the 30-day period. The case 
was assigned to me on October 7, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1a and 1c to 1f, and denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1b and 2a in his response to the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old custodian, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2008.1 Information contained in the FORM indicates that he 
attended high school from September 1974 to June 1970 and was awarded a “high 
school diploma or equivalent” in June 1988. The FORM does not reflect any further 
education beyond high school. Applicant married his wife in July 1980 and does not 
report any dependents. He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists six debts consisting of one judgment, three collection 
accounts, one charged-off account, and one past-due account totaling $11,022. These 
debts are substantiated, in part, by Applicant’s admissions, supra; his May 2009, 
December 2009, and June 2010 credit reports; and a January 2007 record of judgment 
and lien filing. Applicant’s history of indebtedness is documented as early as 2005 and 
has been ongoing. (Items 7-11.) In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated in response to 
SOR ¶ 1b, “I disagree. Settled at [Name] Dist Court in my favor.” (SOR Answer.) 
Applicant has not, however, provided any documentation to corroborate his claim. His 
failure to provide documentation was discussed in Department Counsel’s June 2010 
FORM, yet he failed to address that shortcoming when provided an opportunity to do 
so. 
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in May 2009, he failed to disclose any 
history of adverse information regarding his financial obligations such as collection 
1 Background information is derived from Application’s e-QIP unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
3 
 
 
accounts, charged-off accounts, accounts that were delinquent over 180 days, and 
accounts currently delinquent over 90 days. In short, he failed to disclose any of the 
SOR debts.  
 
Applicant was interviewed in June 2009 by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator in conjunction with his background check for security clearance. 
During that interview, he was confronted with his indebtedness. He indicated that he 
was unable to repay his creditors due to his limited income. Applicant was also queried 
about providing false information on his e-QIP. He indicated that he did not list his 
indebtedness believing it to be a privacy issue and was embarrassed about his financial 
situation. He added that he was not trying to be arrogant about this matter. (Item 7.)  
 
During his June 2009 OPM interview, Applicant explained that his financial 
delinquencies arose because of the following circumstances: (1) a period of 
unemployment from October 2006 to June 2008; (2) uncovered medical bills; (3) costs 
associated with his son getting married; (4) his spouse lost her job in late 1996; and (5) 
a reduction in his salary. Specific details about these events were not developed in the 
FORM. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant was again made aware of his indebtedness when he received his SOR. 
Apart from denying SOR ¶ 1b, discussed supra, he indicated in his March 2010 
answers that he agreed with the remaining five debts alleged and stated that he would 
pay those debts when he could. Applicant has not offered any documentation that any 
of his debts have been paid, that he has set up payment plans, nor has he submitted 
any evidence that he contacted any creditors or sought credit counseling or that his 
debts are or will be resolved. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
 
4 
 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  Under Guideline F, the concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
5 
 
 
 For the last several years, Applicant accumulated six debts totaling $11,022 as 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant claims that he settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1b. His 
mere assertion that this account is settled is insufficient, particularly in light of the fact 
that his credibility has become an issue. At least five of the six debts alleged remain 
delinquent. Applicant’s history of indebtedness is well documented. AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations” apply. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because the unemployment 
and underemployment that he experienced were largely beyond his control. However, to 
receive full credit under this mitigating condition, Applicant has to demonstrate that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence that Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
remained in contact with his creditors or tried to make minimum payments during this 
time.2  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial counseling. 
Likewise, there is not sufficient evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).3 Despite having being employed full-time since June 2008, there is no 
evidence that Applicant has made any attempt to repay his overdue creditors. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable because Applicant does not dispute the validity of the debts 
alleged. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
2 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts 
current. 
 
3 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his May 2009 e-QIP. Applicant’s explanation that information 
about his financial situation is “private” is insufficient to overcome his obligations to tell 
the complete truth during the security clearance vetting process. Nor is embarrassment 
an acceptable explanation for failure to be totally candid when completing his e-QIP. 
The Government established through the evidence presented the disqualifying condition 
in AG ¶¶ 16(a).4 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
4 Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). 
Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential 
sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
A statement is false when it is made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of financial 
problems and chose not to disclose them for personal reasons. Had Applicant’s 
information been relied upon without verification, he may well have successfully vetted 
for a security clearance. Regardless of the reason Applicant chose not to be 
forthcoming, the process does not allow for applicants to pick and choose which 
answers they will answer correctly. When applicants lie on their security clearance 
applications, they seriously undermine the process as Applicant did in this case. I find 
that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply.5  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
5 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
9 
 
 
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial indebtedness is ongoing. His 
deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance application is serious, 
recent, and not mitigated. As such, I have concerns about his current ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole-person concept, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1a – 1f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2a:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
