KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: An SOR allegation may be included under more than one Guideline and may be given
independent weight under each.  A finding of mitigation under Gone Guideline does not compel
a similar finding under another.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 09-07472.a1
DATE: 02/24/2011
DATE: February 24, 2011
In Re:
--------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07472
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 14, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 15, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge made the following essential findings of fact:  Applicant, a  49-year-
old employee of a Defense contractor, used marijuana about a dozen or more times in 2005, and
cultivated it during the same time period.  In October 2005, he was charged with possession of a
controlled substance, a misdemeanor.  Applicant pled guilty to the charge and received six months
probation.  At the time of Applicant’s drug involvement he held a security clearance.  Decision at
2-5.
Applicant’s drug cultivation and use, his criminal conduct, and the fact that he had used
marijuana while holding a security clearance were alleged under Guideline H of the Directive.  His
marijuana use while holding a security clearance was also alleged separately under Guideline E.
The Judge found in favor of Applicant under Guideline H because Applicant had demonstrated
mitigation of the drug involvement security concerns by presenting substantial evidence that he had
not used marijuana since 2005 and that it was unlikely he would use drugs in the future.  Decision
at 6-7.  However, he found against Applicant under Guideline E.  The Judge’s adverse decision in
that regard was based on the fact that Applicant’s drug use while holding a security clearance
constituted a serious breach of trust, Applicant knew that marijuana use and possession were
proscribed, and Applicant delayed reporting his drug use and conviction to security officials for
several years.  Decision at 8-10.  Although Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding regarding the
time it took for Applicant to report the marijuana incident to his security authorities, the Judge’s
description represents a reasonable characterization of the record evidence.
On appeal, Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision under Guideline E should be
reversed because: 1) the Judge did not acknowledge the difficult circumstances under which the
conduct in Applicant’s case occurred, and 2) the Judge erred, as a matter of law, in finding against
Applicant under Guideline E, having found in his favor under Guideline H as to the same factual
allegation.  Those arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious
or contrary to law. 
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of
fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App.
Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge
weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he specifically
states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05485 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2011).  Applicant has
not overcome this presumption.  It is clear from a reading of the Judge’s decision as a whole that he
gave consideration to the unique facts of Applicant’s case, engaging in a detailed, sustainable
analysis of Applicant’s circumstances, which resulted in favorable findings as to some facts of
security concern but not as to others.
The Board has previously noted that an SOR allegation may be included under more than
one Guideline and may be given independent weight under each.  Furthermore, a finding of
mitigation under one Guideline does not compel a similar finding under another.  In considering an
applicant’s claim that a Judge has treated two Guidelines inconsistently, the Board examines the
record and the Directive to determine if there is a rational basis for the Judge’s decision.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-07575 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 8, 2010).  In this case, the seriousness of security
concern presented by Applicant’s drug involvement while holding a clearance, coupled with the
continuing poor judgment in failing to report that involvement to appropriate security officials over
an extensive period of time, served as a sufficient, sustainable basis for the Judge’s different
conclusions under Guidelines H and E.
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484
U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
