                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06075 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 5, 2010, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 6, 2010. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and it was received on December 13, 2010. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case 
was assigned to me on February 1, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except ¶ 1.g, which he denied. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He has been married since 1971 and has five children. 
He served honorably in the Army from 1967 to 1978. Since 1997 he has been self-
employed as the president and chief executive officer of his own business. He also 
receives tax-free Veteran’s Affairs monthly disability payments of $3,159. His wife 
receives monthly payments of $1,800 tax-free Social Security disability payments. Their 
annual tax-free household income is approximately $59,508. They also receive 
business income.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owes six delinquent debts totaling $45,017. The 
alleged debts include two voluntary repossessions of automobiles and two judgments. 
Also included in the allegations is a 1999 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge.  
 
 Applicant has operated his current business, Company X, since 1997, after 
turning over his prior business, Company Y, to his wife.1 Applicant stated in his answer 
to the SOR dated September 5, 2010, that: [Company X] is making money each month, 
which stays in the firm for growth and dividends to the stockholders.”2 He owns 98% of 
the stock of the company and receives profits in the form of dividends.3 In Applicant’s 
personal subject interview which he certified as correct on March 30, 2010, he stated 
that the “reason for [his] financial issues were due to the business he owns and 
operates having little to no business since 2005.”4 Applicant did not provide any 
documentary evidence about his business or personal financial status. 
 
 In 1998, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a), a year after his 
current business began. The bankruptcy was discharged in 1999. Applicant stated in his 
answer that he was forced to file for bankruptcy because his accountant embezzled 
$900,000 from him. Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence, such as police 
reports, tax records, or other documents to support his position. 
 
1 There is no evidence available as to the current status of Company Y. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In 1994, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed Federal Tax Liens against 
Applicant and seven lawsuits were filed resulting in judgments against him in 1998. In 
1999 and 2000, State Z obtained civil judgments against Applicant.5 
 
 On April 24, 1984, Applicant made a sworn statement explaining his financial 
problems began in 1983.6 In January 1996, he made another statement and discussed 
that his company had a longstanding contract in December 1993, which caused a 
financial hardship on his company and him personally.7 At that time he estimated his 
total financial liabilities, including money owed to the IRS to be approximately $265,000. 
However, in a statement made in April 1996, as part of a security clearance 
investigation, he claimed that 1995 was a year of recovery for the company and it had 
doubled its revenue since October 1995, and there were early indications that 1996 was 
going to be a prosperous year and the future looked bright.8 
 
 In Applicant’s current security clearance application (SCA) he noted some of his 
past due debts and stated: “I got behind on a lot of my bills due to my wife’s loss of 
income. Everything is now current.”9 
 
 In 2008, a judgment was entered against Applicant (SOR ¶ 1.b, $13,583). This 
was the result of a voluntary repossession by Applicant when he returned a leased 
vehicle to the creditor. He admitted the debt in the SOR, but claimed that because he 
was not told the date the vehicle would go to auction he does not owe the debt. He 
claims this is required by state law. The debt resulted in a lawsuit that Applicant did not 
attend and a judgment was entered against him. He refuses to pay the judgment. In 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR he stated that he relinquished the vehicle to the creditor 
because he and his wife lost their jobs and their only source of income was their 
disability payments. Applicant was self-employed at the time.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f ($9,635) alleged another voluntary repossession of a vehicle. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he could not make the payments because “my wife 
and I lost our jobs due to our disabilities.” Again his position is that because he was not 
invited to the vehicle auction he does not owe the debt to the creditor, and he has no 
intention of paying it. Applicant did not report on his SCA any periods of unemployment. 
He did not provide financial documents supporting his position. He did not provide any 
5 Item 9. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes any debts that were not alleged in the SOR. 
However, I have considered them when analyzing his financial history, credibility, and for purposes of 
mitigation, and analyzing the “whole-person.”   
 
6 Item 14. 
 
7 Item 15. 
 
8 Item 16. I have considered these statements in analyzing Applicant’s credibility and as part of his 
financial history. 
 
9 Item 5.  
 
10 Items 4, 6. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
evidence or information as to how both he and his wife lost their jobs due to disabilities, 
or how they were limited in their ability to operate their own business. Applicant and his 
wife continued to receive monthly tax-free disability benefits during this time.11 
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,127) but disputes the amount. He 
provided no documentary evidence to support his dispute nor did he provide proof of 
payments toward the debt.12  
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($12,620). He provided documents to 
show he agreed to a settlement offer in August 2010 to pay a total of $3,786.06, by 
making monthly payments of $273. Applicant provided some handwritten notes on the 
settlement offer documents, but failed to produce evidence that he has been making the 
payments.13  
 
 Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,919). He provided documentation 
from the collection agency that holds the debt, acknowledging in August 2010 that they 
were in receipt of a post-dated check for $65. The current balance noted on the 
document was $1,621. The debt is unresolved. 
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($5,133) which is a judgment entered in 
2000. The judgment is owed to Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney. Applicant claims he 
paid the debt in July 2006, but he failed to provide any documentary proof that it was 
paid or released.  
 
 Applicant sought credit counseling in the 1990s. There is no evidence of recent 
financial counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
11 In 1984 Applicant reported on his SCA that he relinquished another vehicle for repossession and owed 
$6,500. He disputed the amount of the debt and indicated that he would pursue the matter in court or 
through consumer credit counselors’ assistance. See Item 14. 
 
12 Item 4. 
 
13 Id. 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had his debts discharged in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999. He has 
six delinquent debts, which include two judgments totaling approximately $45,017, that 
are unpaid and unresolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are not paid and therefore remain current. 
Insufficient credible evidence was produced to establish that the debts occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His lack of action to resolve the delinquent 
debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant failed to provide evidence that his financial problems were beyond his control. 
The record showed he made inconsistent statements regarding his business and his 
employment status. He did not provide evidence to support his claim that he and his 
wife lost their jobs due to their disabilities. He failed to provide evidence that if the 
conditions were beyond his control, how he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. Applicant offered no evidence that he 
received recent financial counseling. Applicant refuses to pay a judgment and a 
delinquent debt on two cars that he returned to the creditors when he could not afford to 
pay for them. He claims under a state law he should have been notified of the date of 
the auction. He failed to provide documentary evidence to support he has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the debts, including other debts he disputes. He has 
not provided evidence of his actions to resolve the debt. He did not indicate why he did 
not go to court to contest the claim before a judgment was entered. Applicant failed to 
provide evidence that he is making consistent payments towards resolving the 
remaining debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 60 
years old. He served in the Army and receives VA disability payments. He has a 
significant history of financial problems. He provided statements about the current SOR 
allegations and the record included statements about past financial difficulties he had. 
Applicant refused to pay a legal judgment and another debt for a repossessed vehicle. 
Moreover, he has not taken action to resolve the debt through proper channels. He did 
not provide credible documented proof that he is paying his other delinquent debts. 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion and mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
