                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03059 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel  
Philip Katauskas, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Philip D. Cave, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E. The SOR 
was undated and Applicant received it on March 24, 2010. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 14, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on February 8, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. Applicant did 
not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant and two witnesses testified 
on his behalf. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted into 
evidence without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 16, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has worked for his present employer since July 1, 
2008. He joined the Army in 1979 and served until June 30, 2008, when he was 
honorably retired. Applicant earned an associate’s degree, a bachelor’s degree, three 
masters’ degrees, and he is presently in a doctorate program working on his Ph.D. He 
has held a security clearance throughout his military career, and held a Top Secret 
security clearance since 1995. He also has had access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI) until it was suspended in April 2007. He presently holds a Secret 
security clearance. Applicant has been married since 1988, and has a daughter who 
was born in December 1999.1  
 
Applicant held the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 5 when he retired from the Army, 
but did not have enough time in grade to receive retirement pay at that grade. While 
serving in the Army, he held three different military occupational specialties. They were 
military police, explosive ordnance disposal, and counterintelligence. Applicant served 
in Operation Desert Shield and was deployed in combat operations in Operation Desert 
Storm. He was stationed overseas in 2002. He was deployed serving in combat 
operations during Operation Iraqi Freedom, for 15 months from April 2003 to July 2004. 
After his return, he was notified of new orders and that he and his family would transfer 
in June 2005. Two days before his transfer, his orders were rescinded, and he was 
ordered to a new unit at the same overseas location. He transferred to the new unit in 
June 2005. He deployed a week later for 30 days of training. He later deployed with his 
unit to Iraq for combat operations from September 2005 to September 2006.2  
 
Applicant’s deployments were difficult for his wife who was diagnosed with 
depression. His daughter was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
and was enrolled in the special education class at school. The doctors had difficulty 
determining the correct medication to help his daughter. His daughter had difficulty 
when he was deployed. His wife had difficulty handling their daughter when he was 
1 Tr. 27-28, 31-33, 68-70. Applicant stated he also held a Top Secret security clearance when he was 
working in explosive ordnance disposal.  
 
2 Tr. 26, 29, 34-46, 70-71. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
deployed. Applicant’s second Iraqi deployment exacerbated his wife’s depression, and 
because his daughter was older, she was more aware of his absence and it increased 
the emotional turmoil for the family. During Applicant’s second Iraqi deployment, his wife 
was diagnosed with clinical depression. At the time, he did not understand the 
complexity of the diagnosis or its impact on her and their family. His wife was the 
primary caregiver for their daughter.3  
 
Applicant received new orders and he and his family returned to the United 
States in January 2007. Applicant was unaware at the time of his own emotional 
problems, which were the result of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In 
approximately February 2007, he and his family were assigned government quarters. 
They received their household goods shipment, which was delivered, but not unpacked. 
His wife did not want to unpack the goods. Applicant began organizing the unpacking 
after his work day.4 
 
Applicant and his wife were having behavioral problems with their daughter while 
they were overseas and upon their return to the United States. Applicant and his wife 
took their daughter to school to register her, but they were refused until she completed 
the required school physical. They took her to the military hospital for a physical and 
were informed the first available appointment was in a month. Applicant was required to 
go on temporary duty for two weeks. When he returned he learned that his wife missed 
the appointment for their daughter because the taxi that was to take them was late. 
They were required to reschedule the appointment for her physical and wait another 
month before she could complete the requirements to attend school. Applicant’s wife 
had assured him that she would register the child while he was gone. She did not follow 
through on registering their child.5 
 
When Applicant returned from his temporary duty he discovered his house was in 
shambles. He had difficulty sleeping while he was on temporary duty and felt sleep 
deprived. He created a safe haven room in his house, and locked himself in the 
bathroom. When he returned the household goods boxes were in disarray and none 
had been unpacked by his wife. It appeared his daughter had attempted to take things 
out of some boxes. There were bags of unsanitary trash and the house was generally in 
an unhygienic situation. His wife did not want to do anything or take care of anything. 
Applicant described it as looking like a cyclone had gone through the house.6 
 
On April 17, 2007, Applicant’s daughter called the emergency telephone number 
911 and hung up the telephone. She was concerned because her mother was not at 
home. Applicant was home at the time. The police responded to the call. Applicant 
3 Tr. 37-46, 73-75. 
 
4 Tr. 46-52, 71. 
 
5 Tr. 49, 75-80, 89-92. 
 
6 Tr. 49-53, 55-56, 82. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
explained that when the police arrived he could not respond and his body went into 
shock and he froze. He was apprehended and later went to a Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ) Article 15 nonjudicial punishment hearing for the offenses of child 
neglect, child endangerment, cruelty and maltreatment, conduct unbecoming an officer, 
and abuse and neglect of a child. As a result of the incident, Applicant’s access to SCI 
was revoked on April 27, 2007. He did not appeal the action because he was unaware 
that he could appeal it. He continued to hold a Secret clearance.7  
 
Applicant cooperated fully with military authorities and admitted his culpability in 
the unsafe and unhygienic quarters and the physical condition of his daughter. His child 
was taken into protective custody. He sought mental health counseling, as did his wife. 
In January 2008 Applicant was diagnosed with PTSD manifested with false guilt. It was 
learned that during Applicant’s combat and training duty he had four incidents where 
people he was close to were killed. In Desert Shield, he was scheduled to go with his 
unit on a mission. He was pulled off of the mission at the last minute to interrogate a 
prisoner.8 He stated: 
 
If I had been in the vehicle when it came across an Iraqi checkpoint, the 
AK47 round that hit my friend in the back of the head that would have 
been me instead because I would have been sitting behind him.9 
 
Another time, he had volunteered for a mission and was removed shortly before they 
deployed, so he could attend training. Out of the six people on the mission, four were 
killed, and two were injured in an explosive ordnance accident. Another incident 
involved a well-liked young officer who Applicant had trained and had warned about the 
appropriate response to secondary improvised explosive devices (IED). The officer was 
killed shortly after responding to an IED incident when the secondary one exploded. 
During Applicant’s last deployment, he trained a young female soldier who was the first 
female Filipino American soldier killed in battle. It occurred on Christmas Eve.10 
 
Applicant successfully completed extensive counseling with psychologists and 
psychiatrists from January 2008 to May 2008. He continued with counseling and 
parenting classes after his nonjudicial punishment hearing. He has developed 
mechanisms and counter-measures for dealing with his PTSD, if symptoms recur. He 
has an understanding for when he should seek medical treatment in the future, if those 
measures are unsuccessful. He is not on medication and he has recovered. His wife 
continues to suffer from depression, but is being treated with counseling and 
medication. Applicant’s daughter remained in foster care. After extensive counseling the 
county attempted to reunite her with her parents, and return her to her home in March 
7 Tr. 56-58; GE 4, 11, 13. 
 
8 Tr. 80-82. 
 
9 Tr. 53. 
 
10 Tr. 53-58. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
2009. In June 2009, His wife had to call the police for assistance on two occasions. His 
wife and daughter could not get along. Applicant’s wife admitted she could not care for 
her daughter. There were extensive discussions with the county authorities. Applicant 
and his wife were both represented by attorneys. They agreed to voluntarily terminate 
their parental rights to their daughter, believing it was in her best interest, and on the 
advice of counsel. They completed the voluntary termination of their rights in September 
2009. Presently, they do not have any contact with their daughter, on the advice from 
county authorities that a period of separation would allow the daughter to stabilize. 
Applicant and his wife are not prohibited from seeing their daughter, but rather they are 
following the guidance from the authorities. Applicant hopes once his daughter’s life is 
stabilized they will resume contact. Applicant admitted that this event has been very 
traumatic for him and his wife.11  
 
Applicant’s UCMJ offenses were eventually adjudicated at the nonjudicial 
punishment hearing in May 2008. He pled guilty to the offenses and took full 
responsibility for his actions. Applicant never shifted or shirked responsibility for his 
failure to address the needs of his family, understanding he was ultimately responsible 
for their well-being. He was given a written reprimand. He retired in June 2008.12  
 
Applicant usually handled all of the finances for the family, but while he was 
deployed his wife took care of them. She used their credit cards and accumulated 
approximately $100,000 of credit card debts. Applicant used all of his personal savings, 
retirement accounts, and other assets to settle each debt he owed. After each debt was 
settled, he went back to the creditors and paid them the original amount claimed. He 
paid all of his creditors in seven months.13   
 
A coworker of Applicant’s testified on his behalf. He is a retired military member 
and has held a Top Secret security clearance with access to SCI for many years. He 
has contact with Applicant eight hours a day. Applicant disclosed to him the facts that 
are the subject of this security clearance hearing. He considers Applicant to be a good 
worker and person who has a good reputation within the company. He stated Applicant 
has a good reputation for truthfulness.14  
 
Applicant’s supervisor, who is also vice president of operations and the facilities 
security officer for the company testified on his behalf. He has held a Top Secret 
security clearance with access to SCI for many years. He is also a retired military 
officer. He has known Applicant since Applicant joined the company about three years 
ago. He values his unique skills and concluded his performance is exemplary in his job. 
11 Tr. 58-67, 83-86, 92-98. 
 
12 Tr. 82-84. 
 
13 Tr. 36, 43-46. 
 
14 Tr. 99-107; AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
He believes Applicant has a great reputation at the company. Applicant disclosed to him 
the circumstances from his past that are the subject of his security clearance hearing.15  
 
I have considered all of the documentary evidence provided. The President and 
Chief Executive Officer of the company where Applicant is employed and the Chief 
Operating Officer provided character letters for him. They describe Applicant as a 
person of high character and honesty. They explained that Applicant disclosed the 
issues from his past, both legal and financial, and their impact. He has kept his chain of 
command informed all along the way. They do not believe Applicant presents a security 
risk.16 
 
Applicant’s regional supervisor also provided a statement. He considers 
Applicant’s character and work ethic to be beyond reproach. Based on his personal 
knowledge and Applicant’s reputation, he believes him to be truthful.17 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
15 Tr. Tr. 107-114; AE E. 
 
16 AE D, F. 
 
17 AE G. 
 
7 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable.  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
8 
 
 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant received nonjudicial punishment in May 2008 for conduct associated 
with providing a safe and clean environment for his child in violation of the UCMJ. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant fully acknowledged that he was responsible for ensuring his living 
quarters were clean and habitable, and his obligations to provide care for his daughter, 
and to ensure she was enrolled in school. Unbeknownst to him at the time, he was 
suffering from PTSD. At the same time, his wife was suffering from clinical depression. 
Neither was providing proper care or supervision for their daughter. Other than this 
incident, Applicant had an unblemished military career. He sought counseling and he 
has recovered from his PTSD. His wife continues to suffer from clinical depression, but 
is on medication. They made the difficult decision that it was in their daughter’s best 
interest to terminate their parental rights. The incident that is alleged in the SOR 
occurred in April 2007, almost four years ago. It appears the PTSD had a cumulative 
effect on Applicant because of four traumatic incidents. The offenses were not minor, 
but they did happen under unique circumstances. It is unlikely to recur because he has 
been treated for his PTSD, his wife is on medication, and his daughter no longer lives 
with them. I find this one time incident, does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant completed the necessary counseling to 
change his behavior and has taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors. Applicant’s 
employer and coworker are aware of the circumstances of the incident. Applicant has 
taken positive steps to reduce vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I find 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) apply. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
honorably served in the Army for 29 years. He participated in combat operations during 
Desert Storm, and twice during Operation Iraqi Freedom. He has become an expert in 
his field and continues to serve the military as a civilian.  As a result of his combat 
service, he suffered from PTSD and it affected his home life. He has rectified the 
problem by obtaining counseling and he has recovered. He is aware of mechanisms to 
help him if he feels PTSD symptoms. His wife suffers from clinical depression. She and 
Applicant could not provide the necessary care required for their child with special 
needs. Applicant has addressed the issues that affected his ability to provide the proper 
care for his family. The conduct alleged in the SOR allegation was directly related to his 
PTSD that has been treated. Applicant is not a security risk. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
successfully mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Personal 
Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
