Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government’s exhibits (GE) 1-13, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A-J.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February2
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
I postponed the hearing from 8 February 2010 because of record snow in the metropolitan area.3
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09–04210
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 4 September 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely2
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 4 January
2010, and I convened a hearing 8 March 2010.  DOHA received the transcript 16 March3
2010.
However, Department Counsel moved to strike SOR 1.l as a duplicate of SOR 1.h (Tr. 13).4
SOR 1.i was alleged as a debt $3,000 past due. Applicant defaulted on the account, so the amount being5
repaid is nearly $15,800.
W hich Applicant testified (Tr. 51) had grown to $130,000.6
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.m and 2. a-d.  She is4
a 38-year-old program manager employed by a defense contractor since October 2006.
She has been continuously employed since at least 1991, except for a brief period from
February–May 2006, and a longer period from October 2004 to September 2005, when
she was on medical and maternity leave related to the birth of her second child. She
seeks to retain the clearance required by her job. She has been married three times and
divorced twice, although she is currently separated from her husband for financial
reasons. She and her two children live with her mother to cut expenses. She is a
college graduate, and is one course assignment from obtaining her master’s degree.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (GE 4-6) substantiate, and Applicant
admits 11 delinquent debts, totaling over $120,000. Applicant took no action on these
debts until she received the SOR in October 2009. Her documentation of these efforts
varies considerably in terms of reliability.
Applicant paid the debt at SOR 1.a in November 2009 (AE E). She paid the debt
at SOR 1.f in December 2009 (AE G). She established a repayment plan on the debt at
SOR 1.I in November 2009, and made at least one payment in February 2010 (AE A).5
In January 2010, Applicant negotiated a settlement on the debt at SOR 1.h, a $5,000
debt that had grown to $5,500 (AE F). The creditor agreed to accept $3,570 from
Applicant in four equal payments of about $893, to be paid in late January 2010,
February 2010, March 2010, and April 2010. Applicant testified (Tr. 52) that she was
having payments of $224 deducted from her checking account weekly, but produced no
proof that any payments had been made.
AE B purports to show the debt at SOR 1.b paid in full in November 2009, but the
document itself bears no indication it is anything but a printed page with account
information. There is nothing to indicate the document originated with the creditor.  AE
C is a 4 January 2010 demand letter from a state educational loan authority on a
defaulted loan of $111,500.  Applicant annotated AE C, purporting to show a February6
2010 rehabilitation plan to pay $675 per month for nine months—beginning in March
2010—to rehabilitate the loan, remove it from default status, and return it to a lender to
resume normal payments. However, Applicant has no proof that she has made any
required payment (Tr. 52). In December 2009, the creditor at SOR 1.d offered Applicant
an opportunity to settle the $7,000 loan that had grown to $7,300 (AE D). Handwritten
annotations suggest she was to pay $350 per month for six months, although it is
unclear from the notes what the settlement figure is. AE I suggests that Applicant made
SOR 1.j was alleged as a debt $80 past due. Applicant defaulted on the debt, so the amount being repaid7
was nearly $800.
3
payments in December 2009 and January 2010, and a February 2010 payment was to
be deposited in late February. However, while the balance owed has decreased, it is not
clear what the actual payment was. The creditor for the debt at SOR 1.j demanded
payment in November 2009 (AE H).  Applicant annotated the demand to reflect that she7
paid $805 in February 2010, but she has not otherwise corroborated that payment.
Applicant has taken no action to address the $2,000 defaulted timeshare loan at SOR
1.c, the $2,000 defaulted education loan at SOR 1.e, the $100,000 defaulted home
equity loan at SOR 1.g, or the $700 collection account at SOR 1.k.
Applicant has an extensive history of financial problems over 20 years. In 1991,
when she was 19, she went to work for the federal government as a clerk typist. She got
her first clearance in April 1991 (GE 1, 3). In November 1991, she was charged with
writing worthless checks (GE 7, 8) on the military post where she worked. In May 1992,
she entered a pre-trial diversion program (GE 10). Among other conditions, she was
required to make restitution on the checks, and was ordered to perform community
service. Applicant understood that the charges would eventually be “expunged.” In
December 1991, her clearance was suspended pending investigation into the check
charges and her financial situation (GE 9). As part of that investigation, Applicant
completed another clearance application in December 1991 that showed she had
several delinquent accounts. Based on this information, her agency sent an adverse
information report to the adjudication facility, requesting a final clearance determination.
The record contains no information on the result of that referral. However, she remained
employed by the federal government until October 1998.
Applicant’s finances continued to be problematic. In August 1993, she filed a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, and obtained a discharge of her dischargeable debts in
December 1993 (GE 13). She filed for bankruptcy because she had overspent her
income and was at risk of losing her job (Tr. 80-81). The bankruptcy triggered a security
investigation into her finances. She was interviewed about her finances in August 1995
(GE 12), and provided additional information to the adjudication facility in August and
October 1996 (GE 11). In November 1996, the adjudication facility granted Applicant a
clearance conditioned on her maintaining financial stability and continuing payment on
her delinquent state and local taxes (GE 11). Applicant agreed to the conditions in
December 1996, but there is no information in the record about her satisfying the
conditions.
Applicant attributes her current indebtedness to the foreclosure on her house in
April 2008. She and her husband bought the house in 2004. The initial monthly payment
was $2,500. However, the loan had escalator provisions that eventually raised the
monthly payment to $5,000-6,000. In addition, they took out a home equity loan to do an
addition on the house. They also used some of the money to send one of their children
to private school. Nevertheless, they were unable to keep up the payments and the
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).8
4
house was foreclosed upon. The record is unclear whether they will owe any deficiency
on the loan once the process is complete. 
Applicant does not have a budget, and has not received any credit counseling or
financial education. She was signed up to take a financial class at her local community
college, but the class was cancelled for insufficient enrollment, and Applicant has not
pursued any alternatives.
 When Applicant completed clearance applications in December 1997 (GE 2),
January 1999 (GE 3), and June 2008 (GE 1), she failed to disclose that her clearance
had been suspended in December 1991 as required by the applications. She denies
any intent to falsify her applications, claiming she was told by her employers that her
clearance was only “on hold.” She also claims (Tr. 65-74) that she thought that once her
pre-trial diversion for her bad check charges was complete and the charges expunged,
her clearance issue would be resolved. This is a non sequitur, and is contradicted by
her acknowledgment (Tr. 66) that she signed the notice of suspension (GE 9) in
December 1991.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
¶19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; ( c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;9
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that10
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and11
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20.(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications12
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.13
5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial
difficulties dating to at least 1991.  Her clearance was suspended in December 19919
partly for financial reasons. That she was financially naive at not-yet-20 years old is not
surprising. But she continued to have financial problems, and those problems continued
to imperil her clearance. She pursued a chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in December
1993 because her clearance was at risk, threatening her job. Her finances were again a
focus of clearance-related inquiries in 1995-1996, when she was 24-25 years old. While
her finances appear to have been better from then to 2004, she appears to have
undertaken financial commitments that she did not fully understand.  She took on a
mortgage with interest-rate escalators that drove her monthly payment from $2,500 to
$5,000-6,000. She took on additional debt of a $100,000 home equity loan. She bought
a time-share. And all this was against a backdrop of over $100,000 in education loans.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide little help to Applicant.
Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  The problems are not largely due10
to circumstances beyond her control, particularly where they are of such long duration.
But the most telling aspect of Applicant’s financial problems is her response to them.
Applicant has taken no action on four significant debts, has no plan for
addressing them, and has no plan for even having a plan. Any action she has taken on
her debts has occurred after she received the SOR. DOHA is not the collection agent of
last resort and her efforts to address her debts after the SOR do little to dispel the
security concerns raised by her financial problems. She has little documentation of
claimed payments, itself a potential sign of her financial disorganization. Thus, her
response has been largely unsatisfactory.  She has not undertaken credit counseling of11
any kind of financial education. Her closing argument plea for more time to get her
finances in order concedes that her financial problems are not under control.  The12
payments that have been paid have not been paid in a timely, good-faith manner.13
Whatever efforts she has made to address her poor finances have been belated,
sporadic, ineffectual, and largely undocumented. The record does not indicate when, if
ever, her financial situation will be settled enough for her to make clear progress on her
¶16 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel14
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .; (b) deliberately providing false or misleading
information regarding relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . .;
I find SOR 2.d for Applicant because her bad check arrest in November 1991 and her clearance suspension15
in December 1991 have no independent security significance beyond their relevance as proof of her financial
problems.
6
delinquent debts. I resolve Guideline F against Applicant. Consideration of the whole-
person factors yields no different result.
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. It is unlikely that her employer told her
that her clearance was only “on hold” in December 1991. And even accepting that her
supervisors may have used a less formal term to describe her status, the fact remains
that she received written notice of the suspension and signed a receipt acknowledging
that fact.  Thus, the burden of persuasion shifted to Applicant to refute or mitigate the14
Government’s information.
Applicant’s other explanation that she thought her clearance issue would be
resolved once her criminal record was expunged is simply not credible. The two
processes are completely separate. The language of the investigation question is quite
clear, asking if an applicant has “ever” had an adverse clearance action. The answer to
that question was certainly relevant and material on her December 1997 clearance
application. While the suspension was more remote in time on the January 1999 and
June 2008 clearance applications, the failure to report it continues to have security
significance both as a continuing course of conduct and as additional falsifications
necessary to preserve the first falsification.
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant made no effort to correct her
applications before she was confronted with the information, and her omission was not
significantly aided by incorrect advice given to her about completing her clearance
applications. The whole-person factors require no other result, as there is no evidence
in the record about Applicant that could overcome the negative inferences to be drawn
by her conduct. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.15
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a–k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph l: For Applicant
Subparagraphs m–p: Against Applicant
7
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a–c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In view of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
