                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01986
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Attorney At Law
February 10, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 3, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On October 1, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines G, H and E for Applicant.  The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
“Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD)
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
  The Applicant responded to the SOR on October 31, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
Administrative Judge on January 22, 2010.  The Applicant was on temporary duty
overseas in Afghanistan until August 26, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued on July
9, 2010, scheduling the hearing for September 16, 2010.  The hearing was cancelled
due to his five month extended temporary duty assignment.  Another notice of hearing
was issued on October 6, 2010, scheduling the hearing for December 28, 2010.  At the
2
hearing the Government presented five exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
to 5, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented seven exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G, which were admitted without objection,
and he called three witness.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript
(Tr.) was received on January 13, 2011.  Based upon a review of the pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 58 years old and married with four children.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as a Creative Director/Senior Producer and is applying for a
security clearance in connection with his employment.  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
The Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  The
Applicant has abused alcohol, at times to excess, and to the point of intoxication, from
approximately 1973 to about 1986, and from about 2002 to at least 2008.  He has held
a security clearance since November 2006.  (Tr. p. 92.)
The Applicant is an alcoholic who has been battling the disease for many years.
He started drinking alcohol at the young age of sixteen.  (Tr. p. 93.)  During his last year
of college his problems began to surface.  He has been arrested, charged and
convicted for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI) on three separate occasions.
The first DUI occurred in early 1980's, and the second one occurred in the mid-1980's.
His last arrest for DUI occurred in 1986.  Following his third arrest and conviction, the
Applicant joined Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and attended meetings from October 1986
through November 1987.  Although he did not consume alcohol, he was not actively
working the AA program.  In November 1987, he obtained a sponsor and began working
the program.  He remained sober until 2002, approximately fifteen years.  (Tr. 96.)
In August 2001, he injured his knee and took prescribed pain medication and
muscle relaxers for the pain.  In November 2002, he began having other serious
medical problems, including arthritis, cancer, a bad rotator cuff, (which required
surgery), a stroke and Hepatitis C.  During this time, he was diagnosed with chronic liver
disease and told that he would eventually require a liver transplant and/or die.  He
underwent Chemotherapy for about a year that resulted in fevers, chills, shaking, joint
pain, nausea, vomiting and muscle spasms.  ((Tr. p. 98.)  This treatment was torturous
and caused excruciating pain.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  It was during this treatment that
the Applicant was told that he was going to be laid off.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  It
was also during this treatment that the Applicant relapsed and took more than the
prescription amount of pain medication to seek relief.  In November 2002, he also
consumed alcohol a few times to relieve the pain.  This relapse lasted several months.
(Tr. p. 100.)
3
In March 2003 or 2004, following knee surgery, the Applicant again relapsed, and
took more prescription pain pills than was prescribed.  (Tr. pp. 101-102.)
In September 2008, while in Hawaii on business, the Applicant relapsed a third
time.  This time, he not only used prescription pain pills, including Tylenol and Codeine
that he had left over from another surgery, but oxycontin that he was prescribed in
Hawaii, combined with alcohol, specifically vodka that he had been consuming.  (Tr. p.
124.)  He was found passed out in a beach chair and taken to the emergency room.
Following this relapse, he immediately sought treatment for his alcoholism.  He entered
a one year treatment program for alcoholism  from September 15, 2008, to about June
2009.  During this program, he was diagnosed with Drug Dependence, combined opioid
and others and Alcohol Dependence.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Following this alcohol
treatment program, he resumed his daily attendance at AA.  He also reconnected with
AA.  
Following his relapse in Hawaii, his employer temporarily suspended him from his
job, required mandatory and random drug and alcohol testing, and required that he sign
a statement of intent indicating that if he were ever found intoxicated again, he would be
terminated from his employment.  The Applicant also submitted a letter of intent
indicating that he does not intend to use any illegal drug, or abuse prescription drugs, in
the future and that he understands that if he violates his promise, any security clearance
he has will be automatically revoked.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G.)      
In September 2009, the Applicant deployed to Afghanistan.  He has remained
clean and sober while serving in Afghanistan.  Although he is unable to attend AA
meetings in Afghanistan, his sponsor is available by e-mail and on a monthly basis he
receives and reads bi-monthly AA publications to assist him with his recovery.  Since
returning from Afghanistan, he has been attending three AA meetings a week.  He also
meets with his sponsor weekly, and talks with him on a daily basis.  (Tr. pp. 113-114)
The Applicant has alerted his doctors and the pharmacy concerning his addiction and
no longer wants to be prescribed pain medication.  (Tr. p. 113.)  He currently suffers
from mild depression and is currently taking prozac for his condition.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A and Tr. p. 138.)   
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant denied the allegation set forth under this guideline.  (Applicant’s
Answer to SOR.)  The Applicant has abused controlled substances, to include opiates,
Oxycontine, valium, and a combination of Tylenol and Codeine from about 2002 to at
least 2008.  The Applicant has been prescribed a number of pain medications for
various aliments he has suffered from over the years.  From 2002 to 2008, he was
prescribed pain medications for chronic back and neck pain from osteroarthritis and
knee surgery, for a torn left shoulder rotator cuff, and a torn bicep tenon.  The Applicant
admits that at times to relieve pain he took more of the prescribed pain pills than was
recommended by his doctor.  Sometimes he used pain pills that were left over from
previous ailments to relieve pain for other than what it was originally intended.   
4
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations.  
The Applicant denies each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  The Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National
Security Position dated November 3, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Question 24(b),
asked him if since the age of sixteen or in the last seven years, whichever is shorter,
have he illegally used any controlled substance.  The Applicant answered, “NO.”  This
was a false response.   He failed to list that he abused a number of controlled
substances, specifically Opiates, Oxycontin, Valium, and a combination of Tylenol and
Codeine.
On the same questionnaire dated November 3, 2008, under “Additional
Comments”, the Applicant stated as follows: “In September 2008, I had a brief relapse
by using alcohol while taking prescribed medicine.  I had previously been clean and
sober for 15 years in Alcoholics Anonymous and am again clean and sober for 40 days
(today)...”  (Government Exhibit 1.)  The Applicant failed to disclose that he had
consumed alcohol and abused prescription drugs from at least 2002 to September
2008.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  
During an interview with an investigator on February 2, 2009, the Applicant
stated that he was a recovering alcoholic who had not consumed alcohol or abused any
other controlled substances from November 1, 1987, until the week of September 3,
2008.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  This was false information.  The Applicant failed to
disclose that he has used alcohol and prescription drugs from at least 2002 to
September 2008.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  
The Applicant explained that since the pain pills he was taking were prescribed
by a physician, he did not believe he was abusing them.  (Tr. p. 126 and Applicant’s
Answer to SOR.)  This was a mistaken belief and an attempt to rationalize or justify his
abuse.  I find that the Applicant knew or should have known that he was abusing the
prescription drugs he was taking when he was not taking them as prescribed.  However,
I do not find that he deliberately sought to conceal his abuse of alcohol and prescription
drugs from the Government on his security clearance application since he had already
revealed that he was a recovering alcoholic who had relapsed.  With respect to what he
told the investigator, it is clear that he lied.  He apologizes for his misleading statement
concerning this.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)
Three witnesses, including his pastor, his AA sponsor, and his wife, who is also a
recovering alcoholic, testified on the Applicant’s behalf.  They collectively characterize
the Applicant as an honest, trustworthy, responsible, conscientious, God loving man
and an individual with a renewed commitment to stay sober.  (Tr. pp 38-42, 48-58 and
70-81.)    
5
Applicant’s performance appraisal from October 2009 to May 2010, reflect all
“outstanding” ratings.   His performance appraisal fro May 2010 to November 2010,
reflects that he either “exceeds expectations” or is “outstanding” in every category.
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
A letter from the Applicant’s Information Operations Director, to whom the
Applicant reports, describes the Applicant as an honest, dependable, and mature.  The
Applicant has been assigned many difficult tasks and has successfully accomplished all
of them in a difficult combat environment.  The writer is confident that the incidents in
the past have been resolved.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  
Letters of recommendation and accolades from other professional associates,
coworkers and friends of the Applicant attest to his good character, honesty and
integrity.  His work performance is exceptional and his work ethic is outstanding.  They
see that he is doing all he can to improve himself, his relationship with his family and his
friends.  He is highly recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Exhibits C, D
and F.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22. (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent.
22.  (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence;
22. (e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program;
6
22. (f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of
an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
25.  (a) any drug abuse.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.  (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation;
26.  (c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a serve or prolonged illness during
which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended.
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16. (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
7
16.  (b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other
official government representative.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
8
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse, drug abuse and personal conduct that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in Alcohol Abuse (Guideline G), Drug Involvement (Guideline H),
and poor Personal Conduct (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guidelines G, H and E of
the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant is a recovering alcoholic who had fifteen
years of sobriety before running into problems remaining sober.  He has recently
experienced a series of three relapses in the past ten years, the most recent of which
occurred in 2008, less than three years ago.  Despite his diagnosis of alcohol
dependence, treatment programs for alcoholism that included intensive educational
classes, group therapy, and treatment with a psychiatrist and psychologist, followed by
Alcoholic Anonymous meetings, he has been unable to maintain any long term sobriety.
Presently, he has been abstinent for almost three years.  He appears to have a
renewed commitment to sobriety as a priority in his life.  However, given the nature of
his disease, his recent relapses prevent a favorable finding at this time.  Based upon his
past record of relapse there is no guarantee that he can remain sober in the future.  
Under Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22.(a) alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
9
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, 22.(c) habitual or
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent 22.(d) diagnosis
by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g. physician, clinical psychologist, or
psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence, 22.(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse
or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a
recognized alcohol treatment program, and 22.(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol
abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program apply.  There
is no evidence in the record that any of the mitigating conditions apply.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.
 
The Applicant has also abused an assortment of prescription drugs.  He abused
opiates, Oxycontin, Valium, and a combination of Tylenol and Codeine from about 2002
to 2008.  He knew when he used the pain pills that he was using more than what he
was supposed to, or for a purpose other than for what whey were intended.  His last
abuse of any prescription drug occurred in 2008, about three years ago. Given his
history of addiction, this use is recent and poses a security risk.  Under Guideline H,
Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse applies.  Arguably,
Mitigating Conditions 26.(b)  a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,
such as (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any
violation, and 26.(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a serve or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended apply.  In this
case, however, they are not controlling.  Applicant’s extensive use of prescription drugs
coupled with multiple and recent relapses precludes a favorable finding here.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
 Although the Applicant did not answer the questions correctly in response to his
use of illegal drugs on his security clearance application, I do not believe that he
deliberately attempt to conceal this information.  He did disclose elsewhere in the
application that he was a recovering alcohol that had relapsed.  With respect to what he
told the investigator during his interview, namely that he had not consumed alcohol or
abused any controlled substances from November 1987 to September 2008, this was a
blatant lie that bears no excuse.  The Applicant was not candid or forthcoming with this
information, and therefore, he cannot be trusted with the national secrets. Disqualifying
Condition 16.(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority,
or other official government representative applies.  None of the mitigating conditions
are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal
Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is a 58 year old alcoholic
who has also abused prescription pain pills.  He was not forthright during his interview
with an investigator concerning his illegal drug use.  Under the particular facts of this
case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole,
support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a
lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
10
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
This Applicant has not demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and he
clearly does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement),
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).    
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 3: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.c.: Against the Applicant.
11
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
