 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 (Redacted) ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04706 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William L. Handler, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence), C (Foreign Preference), and E (Personal Conduct). Security concerns under 
Guidelines C and E are mitigated, but security concerns under Guideline B are not 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 17, 2008. On 
June 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B, C, and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 7, 2010; answered it on August 26, 2010; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
August 31, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 30, 2010, 
and the case was assigned to me on October 2, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on November 12, 2010, scheduling it for December 8, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until December 22, 2010, to 
enable Applicant to substitute copies of AX D through J for the originals and to submit 
additional evidence. He timely submitted copies of AX D through J, and he submitted 
AX K and L, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments 
regarding AX K and L are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) II. (HX I is 
discussed below.) DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 17, 2010. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about India. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as HX I. 
I declined to take administrative notice based on a research paper included in HX I, 
whereupon Department Counsel withdrew it from HX I, offered it as GX 4, and it was 
admitted without objection. I took administrative notice as modified and requested by 
Department Counsel, without objection by Applicant. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 After both sides had presented their evidence, Department Counsel moved to 
amend SOR ¶ 1.a(1), alleging that Applicant possesses an active Indian passport, to 
allege that Applicant possesses a current “Persons of Indian Origin” card. Applicant did 
not object, and I granted the motion. (Tr. 108.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a(2) 
and 2.a-2.h. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a(1) and 3.a. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old native of India. He is the chief operating officer and 
facility security officer of a U.S. company seeking to perform services for defense 
contractors. He completed college in India, worked for several information-technology 
companies in India from 1994 to 1999, and came to the United States on a work visa in 
September 1999 to accept an offer of employment. He became a U.S. citizen in April 
2005. He holds an interim clearance but has never been granted a final security 
clearance. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant married an Indian woman in May 1997 and divorced in April 2000, 
while he was still a citizen and resident of India. No children were born from this 
marriage. He has no contact with his former spouse. His current spouse is a native of 
India. She came to the United States when she was 11 years old and became a U.S. 
citizen in November 1998. They were married in the United States in May 2001, and 
they have a daughter, born in October 2005, and infant twins. (GX 2 at 8; Tr. 56.) His 
spouse has been employed by the U.S.-based parent company of several hotels and 
car rental companies for the last seven or eight years. (Tr. 63.) 
 
Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother received her “green card” from the 
U.S. Government in 2006, and she has applied for U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 57; AX I.) She 
lives with Applicant in the United States for six to eight months of the year. (Tr. 77.) She 
is not employed. Applicant claims her as a dependent on his federal income tax returns. 
(AX D, E, and F.)  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of the 
United States. His mother-in-law is a resident alien living in the United States. (Tr. 90.) 
 
 Applicant became a partner in a U.S.-based consulting company in March 2005. 
He and his current spouse own about 54% of the equity in the company, which provides 
software application services, infrastructure management services, and staff 
augmentation or professional services for commercial firms and defense contractors. 
The remaining 48% of the equity is owned by U.S. citizens. (GX 2 at 5.)  
 
 In November 2006, Applicant became a partner in an Indian company that 
provides “back office” administrative support for his U.S.-based company. Applicant and 
his spouse own about 52% of the Indian company, and the remaining equity is owned 
by the same owners as the U.S.-based company, except for a 2.5% interest owned by 
the managing director, who is a citizen and resident of India. (Tr. 83-84.) According to 
Applicant, Indian law requires that one owner be an Indian citizen. Applicant has known 
the managing director since 1994 and has daily business contact with him, but he 
knows little about the managing director’s personal life. (GX 2 at 9; Answer to SOR.)  
 
Applicant’s brother, a citizen and resident of India, is the operations manager of 
the Indian company. Applicant and his brother have daily business contact. (GX 2 at 7.) 
His brother applied for permanent resident status in 2006 and intends to emigrate from 
India and become a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 58-59; AX J.) Applicant testified that his brother 
wants to come to the United States because all of his family is in the United States. His 
brother recently married, and his Indian wife is willing to accompany him to the United 
States. (Tr. 102-03.) 
 
 Applicant has completed the documentation to sponsor three employees of his 
Indian company to obtain work visas and work in the United States. (Tr. 84.) At present, 
only one of the three is working in the United States. (GX 2 at 9.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified that the Indian company has little intrinsic market value 
because it has no clients, but it generates about $1 million per year in income for the 
U.S-based company. The U.S.-based company has annual revenue of about $6 million. 
(Tr. 87-88.) Applicant receives no salary or dividends from the Indian company. (Tr. 89.) 
 
Applicant and his mother have jointly owned an apartment in India, where she 
resides when she is not in the United States, since June 2003. His mother provided 
most of the purchase money. (Tr. 95.) The apartment is worth about $100,000. 
Applicant stays in the apartment for one night on his business trips to India, before he 
travels to various business locations in India. (GX 2 at 6, 11). He intends to sell the 
apartment once his mother moves to the United States and he no longer needs it for 
business. (Tr. 70.) 
 
 Applicant travels to India two or three times a year, using a U.S. passport. He still 
has his Indian passport, but it is invalidated and stamped “Cancelled.” (GX 2 at 12; AX 
B; Tr. 46-47.) Applicant was issued a “Persons of Indian Origin” (PIO) card in January 
2010, which is issued by the Indian embassy for travel to India in lieu of a visa. (AX C; 
Answer to SOR at 1-2.) Only a non-Indian citizen of Indian origin can obtain a PIO card. 
The PIO card allows Applicant to make short-notice trips to India less than two months 
apart. With the ten-year visa he previously held, he was required to have a two-month 
interval between trips to India. (Tr. 99-100.) 
 
 Applicant maintains an account in an Indian bank to provide cash while traveling 
in India. The average balance in this account is about 15,000 rupees, which is less than 
$350. (AX G; Tr. 55.) Applicant maintains the account for convenience, to simplify 
currency conversion, avoid the risk of carrying cash, and avoid the substantial 
international fees for ATMs and credit cards. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant purchased his first home in the United States in 2001. (Tr. 59.) He and 
his wife now own a home in the United States that they purchased in July 2003 for 
$605,000. (AX K.). They currently owe about $309,000 on the mortgage. (AX L.) 
Applicant and his spouse both have IRA accounts in a U.S. bank worth about $34,000 
(AX H.) 
 
 Applicant has little involvement in the community, but he is heavily involved in his 
family, especially the newborn twins. (Tr. 91.) He votes in U.S. elections. (Tr. 92.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he answered “Yes” 
to question 17, asking if he had an active foreign passport in the last seven years, and 
he stated that he had an Indian passport issued in September 1994 with an expiration 
date of May 2005. The face of Applicant’s Indian passport reflects an expiration date of 
August 2014. (AX B.) Applicant testified that he believed that, because India does not 
recognize dual citizenship, his Indian passport was no longer active after he became a 
U.S. citizen. He testified he did not intend to withhold or conceal any information 
regarding his Indian passport. (Tr. 93-94.) He submitted a copy of his Indian passport 
with “Cancelled” written across the first page. (AX B.) 
 
5 
 
 
 India is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorists groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens are known to congregate or visit.  
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The United States is India’s largest foreign investment 
partner. The two countries have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and 
resources, including through the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean, and they share a 
common interest in fighting terrorism and in creating a strategically stable Asia. They 
are seeking to foster bilateral relations by establishing working groups to address (1) 
strategic cooperation; (2) energy and climate change; (3) education and development; 
(4) economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) science and technology, health, and 
innovation.  
 
 In the past, India had long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet 
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
There have been numerous incidents of international businesses illegally exporting, or 
attempting to export U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India. 
 
 The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity.  
 
 India does not recognize dual citizenship. Foreign citizens entering India are 
required to obtain a visa. Travelers entering on tourist visas are not allowed reentry 
within two months, unless they obtain specific permission. Non-citizens of Indian origin 
may obtain a PIO card, which allows unlimited travel to and from India.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
 
6 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR, as amended, alleges that Applicant exercises dual citizenship with 
India by possessing a PIO card (¶ 1.a(1). It also cross-alleges the allegations under 
Guideline B that Applicant is a partner in an Indian business (¶ 2.a), owns an apartment 
 
7 
 
 
in India (¶ 2.d), and maintains a bank account in India (¶ 2.e). The security concern 
relating to Guideline C is set out in AG & 9: “When an individual acts in such a way as to 
indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may 
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.” 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile to the 
U.S. “Under the facts of a given case, an applicant’s preference, explicit or implied, 
even for a nation with which the U.S. has enjoyed long and peaceful relations, might 
pose a challenge to U.S. interests.” ADP Case No. 07-14939 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 
2009). 
 
 A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen . . . .” AG ¶ 10(a). Exercise 
of foreign citizenship includes but is not limited to: “possession of a current foreign 
passport” and “using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country.” AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and (5). This disqualifying condition is not established, 
because Applicant is no longer an Indian citizen. He acquired his interest in the Indian 
company after becoming a U.S. citizen and losing his Indian citizenship. His Indian 
passport is not longer valid. He uses his U.S. passport to travel to and from India. His 
possession of a PIO card in lieu of a visa is a privilege derived from being born in India, 
not from Indian citizenship. Applicant is treated as a foreigner when he travels to India.  
 
 Although not encompassed by the enumerated disqualifying conditions, the SOR 
alleges that Applicant’s business and property interests in India reflect a preference for 
India over the United States. This allegation is not supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant’s acquisition of a controlling interest in the Indian business was motivated by 
the desire for low-cost administrative services for his U.S.-based business. He 
purchased the apartment to provide housing for his mother and for occasional business 
use. His small bank account is designed solely to facilitate his business travel.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is a partner in an Indian business and holds about 
50% equity in it (¶ 2.a), he and his mother jointly own an apartment in India (¶ 2.d), and 
he maintains a bank account in India (¶ 2.e). It also alleges that Applicant’s mother is a 
citizen and resident of India with permanent resident status in the United States (¶ 2.b), 
his brother is a citizen and resident of India and the operations manager of Applicant’s 
business (¶ 2.c), he maintains contact with a close friend who is a citizen and resident 
of India and the managing director of Applicant’s business (¶ 2.f), and he has traveled to 
India two or three times a years since about 2003 (¶ 2.h). Finally, it alleges he has 
initiated the process to sponsor five non-U.S. citizens for immigration into the United 
States (¶ 2.g). 
 
 
8 
 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  
First, a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in 
 
9 
 
 
a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Applicant’s mother is a permanent alien 
resident of the United States, but she spends substantial time in India. Applicant’s 
brother is a citizen and resident of India, recently married to a citizen and resident of 
India. As an executive in a U.S.-owned business, his brother is vulnerable to terrorists in 
India who target U.S. interests.  
 
 Applicant’s business in India has little intrinsic value, because it has no clients 
and exists only to provide low-cost “back room” administrative services to his U.S.-
based company. Nevertheless, his Indian business generates about $1 million per year 
in gross income for his U.S.-based business.  
 
Applicant’s apartment in India, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d, was financed primarily by 
his mother. It is her residence in India, and is used intermittently for Applicant’s 
business-related travel. His Indian bank account, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.e, is of minimal 
value and used for business travel. These two assets are part of Applicant’s foreign 
business and, as such, have no independent security significance. Similarly, Applicant’s 
foreign travel, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h, is connected to his business and his family ties, 
and has no independent security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 21, 2005). I will resolve SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.e, and 2.h in Applicant’s favor. 
 
The allegation in SOR ¶ 2.g that Applicant has sponsored five non-U.S. citizens 
for immigration into the United States also has no independent security significance. 
Two of the five persons alleged are Applicant’s mother and brother. The remaining three 
are Applicant’s employees, brought into the United States as resources for his U.S.-
based business. Rather than raise security issues, Applicant’s sponsorship of Indian 
citizens tends to reduce the likelihood of influence by removing them from the influence 
of the Indian government, foreign terrorists, and governments unfriendly to the United 
States with whom India has relationships. I resolve SOR ¶ 2.g in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Considering Applicant’s foreign family ties and foreign financial interests as a 
whole, they are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (e). Thus, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 
10 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). India and the United States have common interests and values. 
Nevertheless, India’s ties to Iran and Russia, its involvement in economic espionage, 
and the level of terrorist activity directed toward Western interests preclude application 
of this mitigating condition. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for more than five years. His spouse has lived in the 
United States since she was 11 years old, and she has been a U.S. citizen for 12 years. 
He is gradually bringing all his immediate family to the United States. On the other 
hand, he has little connection to his community. His focus has been on his family and 
his business, which are the sources of the conflict of interest. His brother is a citizen and 
resident of India, and his mother still spends considerable time in India. His foreign 
financial interests are substantial, and his family ties are strong. I conclude that AG ¶ 
8(b) is not fully established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from financial interests can be mitigated if “the value or 
routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they 
are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure the individual.” AG ¶ 8(f). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s foreign business interests are substantial and make 
him vulnerable to influence, manipulation, or pressure. 
 
Guideline C, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified is security clearance application by stating 
that his Indian passport expired in May 2005, when in fact it was valid until 2014. The 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
 
11 
 
 
questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his security 
clearance application, and the evidence establishes that Applicant believed his passport 
expired when he became a U.S. citizen. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. 
No other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established. See AG ¶ 17(f) 
(security concerns mitigated if “the information was unsubstantiated”). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult, and a loyal citizen of the United 
States. He has clearly demonstrated preference for the United States. He is a 
successful entrepreneur operating in a global economy. Nevertheless, his family ties 
and business interests in India make him vulnerable to foreign influence from India, 
international terrorists, and unfriendly countries such as Iran with whom India has a 
bilateral relationship.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline C and 
B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference and he has 
refuted the allegation of falsifying his security clearance application, but he has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family ties and foreign business 
interests. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a(1) and (2):   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.d-2.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g-2.h:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline C (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
