1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
          -------------------------------)       ISCR Case No. 09-05149
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 16, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline J for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 10, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on September 8, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
November 1, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 22, 2010.
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit A, which was also admitted
without objection. At the request of Applicant, the record remained open until December
6, 2010, to allow Applicant to offer post hearing documents. Applicant submitted no
additional documents. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on December 7,
2
2010. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 26 years old. He is not currently married, but he has two children.
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
(Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has
engaged in criminal conduct. The SOR lists four allegations under Adjudicative
Guideline J, and in his RSOR, Applicant admitted each allegation.  The allegations will
be discussed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. The SOR alleges that in about July 2004, Applicant was arrested and
charged with “Abuse Family.” The charge was dismissed with prejudice. 
Applicant testified that at the time of this incident, he and his girlfriend were
having a verbal argument, when she got very angry and began striking, kicking, and
scratching him. He tried to leave, but she continued to attack him. He pushed her away,
and he put his mouth on her cheek and made a hickey mark. Later when his girlfriend
was at work, either she or one of her employees called the police, who ultimately
arrested him. He was bailed out that night, and the next week he appeared in court. He
was informed the charges were going to be dismissed without prejudice, so he could be
recharged for this incident, but Applicant testified that he was never recharged. (Tr at
25-29.) This contradicts the SOR that alleges the charge was dismissed with prejudice.
1.b. The SOR alleges that in about April 2005, Applicant was arrested and
charged with Assault 3 , two counts. The charge was dismissed with prejudice. rd
Applicant testified that this incident occurred when he was walking to his vehicle
at night when he was confronted by three males, whom he did not know and who
appeared to be intoxicated. They approached him in a belligerent manner, and one of
the individuals had a knife. As they got closer, Applicant punched one of them, because
he did not want to wait to be attacked. During the altercation, he received lacerations on
his hand and forearm. He then left the area to seek medical aid for his lacerations, and
while on the way to the hospital, he was stopped by the police. He was arrested, but
when he appeared in court, the case was dismissed, because a restaurant owner in the
area had given a statement that the three individuals had harassed him earlier in the
evening. Applicant had no other contact with these three individuals, either before or
after this incident. (Tr at 29-35.) 
3
1.c. The SOR alleges that in about April 2007, Applicant was arrested and
charged with Assault 3. Applicant entered into a Deferred Acceptance of Nolo
Contendere for one year and was ordered to complete an alcohol and drug course,
complete an alternative to violence course, and to pay restitution.  
Applicant testified that he had been told that a 23 year old male, whom he
believed to be a drug dealer, was buying alcohol for his 16 year old sister. This upset
Applicant, who considers himself the head of his household, because his mother is
deceased and his father does not live near the rest of his family. When Applicant saw
this individual at a restaurant, they had a confrontation. Applicant averred that this
individual grabbed a knife, and because he felt threatened, Applicant began fighting with
the man. The police were called and Applicant was arrested. 
Applicant contended that he had never used drugs and had not consumed
alcohol in more than two years prior to the incident, but because he said he had used
alcohol in the past, he was ordered to attend 26 week drug and alcohol course, two
times a week. Applicant stated that he completed the course as required.  He also was
ordered to attend an additional 26 week course on alternatives to violence and pay a
fine for restitution of approximately $700, which he did. (Tr at 35-43.) 
1.d. The SOR alleges that in about August 2007, Applicant was arrested and
charged with Failure to Appear. Applicant testified that he had been unaware that he
was ordered to be present in court, regarding the conduct that has been reviewed as
1.c., above. When he became aware that he had missed a court appearance and that a
warrant had been issued for his arrest, he went to the police station where he posted
$500 bail. The next week, he appeared in court with the proper documentation, the
$500 was refunded to him, and the case was dismissed without prejudice. Applicant did
not have documentation from the court showing that the case had been dismissed. The
record was kept open to allow him to submit the proper documentation, but none was
received. (Tr at 35-47.) Department Counsel did offer in his closing statement that the
Government did investigate this charge, and it appears that it has been resolved. (Tr at
59.) 
Applicant testified that since 2007, he has had no further contact with law
enforcement. He has been coaching several sports teams including high school football.
He also stated that he has two younger brothers and two younger sisters, as well as an
older half-sister, and since his mother died in 2006, he has taken responsibility for
taking care of his family. (Tr at 48-54.) 
Mitigation
Applicant submitted five character letters, three from adults and two from
children. (Exhibit A.) The three adult character letters were from friends of Applicant. He
was described as someone who would do well with any task that required “enthusiasm,
hard work and reliability.” He also was described as “reliable and dedicated.”
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
I have reviewed all of the evidence with regard to what criminal activity occurred.
Applicant, by RSOR and testimony, conceded that all of the incidents that are the
subject of SOR subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d. did occur. However, based on
Applicant’s uncontroverted testimony, there were extenuating circumstances regarding
each event. Applicant’s conduct that precipitated allegation 1.a. was based on his
coming under attack from his girlfriend at the time; and 1.b., occurred when he was
threatened by three males, at least one of whom was armed with a knife. He was not
prosecuted for either of these events, so I cannot conclude that he engaged in criminal
conduct under allegation 1.a. or 1.b.
Based on Applicant’s testimony, the incident that is the subject of 1.c. involved a
drug dealer, who was purchasing alcohol for his 16 year old sister.  While this conduct
did result in his Deferred Acceptance of Nolo Contendere for one year, during which he
was ordered to complete an alcohol and drug course, an alternative to violence course,
and to pay restitution, Applicant did have provocation for his conduct. Finally, Applicant
averred that he failed to appear in court, because he had not been aware of the order
for him to appear. Once he became aware of that order, he made the court appearance
and the warrant was dismissed. There has been no evidence of any other criminal
conduct since 2007. 
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions, I find that ¶ 31(a), “a single serious
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” applies in this case, since there was one incident of
criminal activity that occurred in 2007.  ¶ 31(c), “allegations or admissions of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,” is also applicable to
this case. As reviewed above, I do not find that the Government has established that
Applicant engaged in the criminal activity, as alleged in 1.a. and 1.b. 
Under the mitigating conditions,  I find that AG ¶ 32(a) is applicable as “so much
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened” that “it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement.”
AG ¶ 32(d) is also applicable, as “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation”;
“including the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity.”  Appellant’s
criminal activity has been mitigated. Guideline J is found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
6
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the letters received from
Applicant’s friends, and the Mitigating Conditions that apply, including the time that has
elapsed since the last allegation of criminal conduct, I find that the record evidence
leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. -  1.d.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
