 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 09-06538 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On December 12, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2010, and requested that the case 
be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 19, 2010, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing ten Items and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy on October 20, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 26, 2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections to the FORM and 
submit additional information. He did not submit any additional documentation. On 
December 14, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of 
the SOR. He denied the allegation contained in Paragraph 2.a and admitted the 
allegation contained in Paragraph 2.b. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old and married. He and his wife have three children, ages 
5, 7, and 9. He graduated from high school in May 2000. He attended college from 
January 2003 to December 2005. (Item 5.)  
 
 After finishing high school, Applicant began working for a department store in 
July 2000. He worked there until he and a co-worker were terminated in August 2001 for 
theft. He admitted that he stole approximately $1,500 of property from the store. He 
pleaded guilty to felony theft and was given a Deferred Adjudication and placed on four 
years of community supervision that he completed. He was 19 years old at the time. 
(Item 6.) 
 
 From December 2001 to April 2003, Applicant worked as a laborer for a 
landscaping company. From April 2003 to October 2005, he was a property manager for 
an apartment complex. In October 2005, he obtained another property management 
position. He worked there until March 2008 when he was terminated for insubordination 
and failing to follow instructions. His employer noted in Applicant’s Employee 
Termination Report that on two occasions Applicant was also involved in two conflict of 
interest situations: (1) he entered into a landscaping contract on behalf of management 
with his father-in-law that increased the monthly payment by $200 per month; and (2) he 
gave unauthorized concessions to his brother, who was a resident at the complex.  
Applicant asserted he was fired because of a personality conflict between him and his 
supervisor and he made no mention of the incidents involving his family. (Items 4, 6.) 
 
 From March 2008 to July 2008, Applicant was self-employed. He then worked as 
a clerk for one month. He was unemployed for a month. In September 2008, he started 
his present position as a lab assistant for a defense contractor.   
 
 In January 2009, Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss his job 
terminations and delinquent accounts. During that interview, he indicated that he began 
falling behind in paying his bills in 2003, because he stopped working when he and his 
wife began having children. He agreed to contact his creditors to begin resolving the 
debts. (Item 6 at 57.) In December 2009, he wrote letters to many of his creditors 
requesting settlement options. (Item 6.) According to his December 2009 budget, he 
and his wife had a net monthly income of $4,051 and expenses of $2,030. After making 
 
3 
 
 
payments on three debts, including his student loan, he had $1,548 remaining at the 
end of the month. (Item 6 at 62.) 
 
Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated December 2008, May 2010, June 
2010, and September 2010, the SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts totaling $9,110 that 
began accruing in 2006. Three of those debts are delinquent medical bills and total 
$1,186. Ten of the debts consist of credit card bills, a cell phone, and an automobile 
finance bill. His student loan has an outstanding balance of $629 on a $17,023 balance. 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he would “continue to make all attempts 
to satisfy my debts with what my current job’s finances allow.” (Item 4.) 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation that any of the debts are paid or 
resolved. He did not submit any evidence that he has participated in credit counseling or 
budget education. He provided no information concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
 
4 
 
 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on four CBRs and his admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his delinquent debts that began accruing in 2003 and continue into the 
present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
According to Applicant’s statements, his financial delinquencies began accruing 
in 2003 and remain unpaid or unresolved. Because the problems are ongoing and not 
isolated, there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is 
unlikely to recur or continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. He did not present 
credible evidence that the accumulation of $9,117 of delinquent debt was due to 
conditions beyond his control or that he attempted to responsibly manage the debts 
once they accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). He did not 
submit evidence that he received financial counseling or that he paid or resolved any of 
the 14 debts, which would indicate that the situation is under control. Nor, did he 
present evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve the debts, including 
his student loan. Despite his statement in January 2009 that he would begin addressing 
the delinquent debts, Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation that he did so. 
There is no evidence in the record verifying that he formally disputed or investigated any 
debts, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG & 20(e). There is no evidence 
to support the application of AG & 20(f). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
In 2001, Applicant was fired from his employment for stealing property. He was 
criminally prosecuted and placed on community supervision for four years. Although 
that conduct was not raised as a security concern under the criminal conduct 
guideline, it does raise questions about Applicant’s current judgment and 
trustworthiness, when coupled with his employment termination in 2008 for failure to 
follow directions and engaging in inappropriate situations involving his position and his 
family. The evidence is sufficient to raise said disqualifying condition.    
AG ¶ 17 includes three conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because the 2001 incident is not minor. It was 
prosecuted as a felony and it involved Applicant abusing his position as a trusted 
employee. The 2008 incident is sufficiently recent and continues to cast doubt on his 
current good judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Applicant did not provide any 
evidence to trigger the application of AG ¶ 17 (d) or AG ¶ 17(e). 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since September 2008. In January 2009, he 
learned of the Government’s concerns relating to his financial delinquencies, and 
indicated his willingness to resolve the matters. He also was notified of the personal 
conduct concerns regarding his employment history. In June 2010, DOHA filed a SOR 
and in October 2010, the Government filed the FORM. For more than a year, Applicant 
has been on notice that his delinquent debts were creating security concerns and 
potentially affecting his employment. Despite that knowledge, he did not provide proof 
that he has taken steps to address any of the delinquent debts, including paying the 
smaller debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.b for $200 or SOR ¶ 1.c for $189. Nor did he document 
the current status of his student loans. Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
rehabilitation, which would tend to indicate that the continuance of these unaddressed 
obligations is unlikely. The record contains insufficient evidence about his character, 
trustworthiness, or reliability, which could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
concerns or make their recurrence less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:             Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
