 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07456   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 14, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has an inability to satisfy his financial indebtedness. He currently has 
13 delinquent debts, and has only made payment arrangements on one of his debts. He 
has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons (SOR) in writing on October 21, 
2010, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on November 16, 2010. 
The Government’s submission included Government Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 9. 
Applicant expressed no objection to the Government’s submissions and they were 
admitted. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was received by 
Applicant on December 9, 2010. He was afforded a 30-day opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. On 
December 9, 2010, Applicant responded with a thirty-two page submission (Reply). The 
Department Counsel had no objections. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 
2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. From August 1988 
through March 1993, Applicant was enlisted in the Army. He has worked for his current 
employer since 2008. He has been married since 1990. In his Reply, Applicant indicated 
that he and his wife are now separated. He did not identify any children on his security 
clearance application, although he identified three sons and a daughter in his adopted 
statement. (Reply; GE 5; GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant identified that he had been over 180 days delinquent on debts in the 
past seven years and that he was currently over 90 days past due on debts, when he 
completed his security clearance application. The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts, 
which are all substantiated in the record, although two of the listed debts are duplicated 
in the allegations. Applicant admitted owing allegations 1.a, 1.e., 1.f., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 
and 1.n.  He indicated that he denied 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.g., 1.i., 1.m., and 1.o. as alleged 
in the SOR. Applicant’s delinquent debt as listed in the SOR totals $128,678, however, 
after adjusting the debt to avoid being duplicative, the final total is $102,401. (GE 4; GE 
5; GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9.)  
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in approximately September 
2008, when he moved from one state to another state. In his adopted statement, 
Applicant indicated that he was in the process of contacting his creditors to make 
payment arrangements with them. Applicant, in his Reply, asserts that he has been 
current on his bills for the past year, and that his wife has failed to give him proof of 
payment for several of her student loan accounts. (Reply; GE 6.) His debts are as 
follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collections agent for a gas company in the approximate 
amount of $990, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. Applicant failed to offer evidence 
that he has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collections agent for a telecommunications company in 
the approximate amount of $143, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. In his adopted 
statement, Applicant indicated this debt was incurred after Applicant’s move from one 
state to another. He indicated he will pay this account, but provided no proof that this 
account has been settled. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 6; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collections agent in the approximate amount of $1,367, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has 
made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the approximate amount of 
$757, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he 
has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collections agent in the approximate amount of $4,091, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has 
made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collections agent in the approximate amount of $9,098, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f. Applicant’s Reply indicates that he has been 
making monthly payments of $750 on this account since April 2010. He provided copies 
of his account statements that show $750 payments per month from July 2010 through 
November 2010. His balance on this debt, as of November 2010, is $5,464.49. (Reply; 
GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is past due $26,134 on a $272,000 mortgage, as alleged in SOR 
subparagraph 1.g. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has made payment 
arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent student loan in the approximate amount of 
$37,192, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h. Applicant acknowledged this debt in his 
adopted statement. He explained that the debt was for a loan his wife obtained to attend 
college in approximately 2008. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has made 
payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 6; GE 7; GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a repossessed vehicle in the approximate amount of 
$20,769, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.i. In his adopted statement, Applicant 
explained that in 2008, he purchased a new vehicle. At the time of the purchase, he 
traded in a used vehicle, financed by this creditor, which had not yet been full paid off. 
Applicant did not believe he was responsible for the amount still owed and indicated he 
did not intend to pay further on this account. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he 
has disputed this debt, made payment arrangements, or otherwise satisfied this 
account. (GE 6; GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a student loan account in the approximate amount of 
$236, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.j. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he has 
made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a student loan account in the approximate amount of 
$573, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.k. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he 
has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a mortgage debt in the approximate amount of $26,134, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.l. This debt appears to be a duplicate of the 
mortgage debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.g. Applicant failed to offer evidence that 
he has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent telephone account in the approximate 
amount of $143, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.m. This debt appears to be a 
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. (GE 7; GE 8; GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a student loan account in the approximate amount of 
$500, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.n. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he 
has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged off account in the approximate amount of 
$524, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.o. Applicant failed to offer evidence that he 
has made payment arrangements or otherwise satisfied this account. (GE 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial statement, completed as part of his Answers to 
Interrogatories in June 2010, indicated that his household net income was 
approximately $8,798.88 per month and that his monthly expenditures totaled 
$5,631.84. He was operating at a monthly surplus of $3,164.04. He listed no savings or 
other assets. Applicant did not provide an updated budget with his Reply. (GE 7.) 
 
 Applicant failed to submit any reference letters or work performance evaluations 
to support his character. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
5 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts, totaling $102,401, and is 
unable to pay his obligations. Further, his financial problems have been ongoing for at 
least the past two years, without resolution. Yet his 2010 budget showed he was 
 
6 
 
operating with a monthly surplus of $3,164. From his budget, it appears that he has the 
funds available to pay on his delinquent accounts, but has failed to do so. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved the 13 debts alleged in 
the SOR. He documented payments to only one creditor, as listed in 1.f. His financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant’s debts were not caused by 
circumstances beyond his control. He did not present evidence that his move from state 
to state was not voluntary or that his separation with his wife has caused inability to 
satisfy his financial responsibilities. Further, to be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. While he submitted 
evidence of payments on the debt listed in allegation 1.f., he did not submit evidence of 
how the rest of his debts were being resolved. I am unable to make a determination that 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not produce any evidence to suggest he attended any financial 
counseling. Further, there is little indication that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are 
being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent debts. 
The record fails to establish that Applicant has contacted the creditors or made any 
other good faith efforts to repay his financial obligations alleged in subparagraphs 1.a.-
1.e., 1.g.-1.k., and 1.n.-1.o. He is paying on the debt listed in 1.f., but it appears from his 
monthly budget that he could afford to pay on his other debts as well. Further, he did 
little to show any concrete good-faith efforts he has taken to contact his creditors about 
these debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 In his adopted statement, Applicant disputed the debt listed in 1.i. With respect to 
this disputed account, Applicant failed to present any evidence to show that he was in 
the process of disputing this debt formally with the creditor or that he had successfully 
disputed this debt in the past. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
48-years old. He is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible. He has had 
ample opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, but has failed to do so.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
