 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 (Redacted) )  ISCR Case No. 09-08410 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on July 31, 2009. On 
October 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline G. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on October 20, 2010; answered it on November 5, 
2010; and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received 
his response on November 8, 2010. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
 2
written case on December 8, 2010. On December 15, 2010, a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on December 24, 2010, and he responded and 
submitted additional materials on January 19, 2010. Department Counsel did not object 
to the additional materials. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since October 1981. He married in March 1981. 
He and his wife have three daughters, ages 34, 29, and 16. He has held a security 
clearance since October 1981.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted being arrested for driving under the 
influence (DUI) in May 1974 and October 1977, but there is no evidence in the FORM 
indicating the circumstances of these arrests or of their disposition. 
 
 In March 1984, Applicant was driving and was stopped by the police for failing to 
use his turn signal. A breathalyzer test reflected a blood-alcohol level of 2.4. He was 
convicted of DUI, fined $300, and his driver’s license was suspended for 120 days. 
(Item 8 at 4.) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant was driving and was stopped by police for crossing 
the center line. He had consumed at least seven or eight beers. He was charged with 
driving or attempting to drive under the influence. The charges were dismissed. (Item 
11.) According to Applicant, his lawyer was able to have the charges dismissed “on a 
technicality.” (Item 8 at 3.) 
 
 In April 2009, Applicant was involved in a car accident when he crossed the 
center line and hit an oncoming vehicle. He refused to take a field sobriety test or 
breathalyzer, and was arrested for DUI. Pursuant to a plea bargain, he received 
probation before judgment, was placed on probation for 18 months, and was required to 
complete substance abuse treatment. (Item 10.) He received substance abuse 
treatment from June 18, 2009, to August 11, 2009, and upon discharge he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent. His prognosis was: “good provided he follows an 
aftercare program that includes sober support system and following a relapse 
prevention plan.” The credentials of the counselor making the diagnosis and prognosis 
are listed as “CAC-ADP.” Another staff member is identified as a “CSC.” The supervisor 
is identified as “LCPC, LCADC.” None of these alphabetical credentials are defined. The 
clinical records do not contain actual or electronic signatures in the block for “physician.” 
 
 
 3
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at age 16, consuming a beer about once a 
month. From age 18 to 21, he consumed three or four mixed drinks two or three times a 
week. (Item 9 at 2.) In an interview with a security investigator in August 2009, Applicant 
stated that before his last DUI he was consuming three or four beers in a sitting and 
drinking to intoxication four times a week. (Item 8 at 4.) In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he drank his last beer on February 14, 2010. He has abstained 
from all alcoholic beverages since March 20, 2010, when he consumed two glasses of 
champagne at his 29th wedding anniversary. He and his wife have removed all alcoholic 
beverages from their home. In June 2010, after reflecting on his life and researching the 
subject of alcoholism, he concluded that he is an alcoholic. In August 2010, he began 
attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings once or twice a week. (Item 4 at 4.) 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM dated January 19, 2011, he stated that he 
continues to attend AA meetings once a week. He successfully completed his probation 
on December 4, 2010. He listed numerous awards and commendation received during 
his 29 years of service but did not attach them to his response. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
 4
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the 
point of intoxication, from approximately the age of 16 to at least February 14, 2010 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). It alleges that he was arrested for DUI in May 1974, October 1977, March 
1984, September 2007, and April 2009, and that after his last DUI arrest he received 
probation before judgment and was required to complete a six-week alcohol treatment 
program (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d.) It further alleges that in June 2009, he was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependency (SOR ¶ 1.e). Finally, it alleges that he continues to consume 
alcohol notwithstanding his treatment for alcohol dependency (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline G is set out in AG ¶ 211: “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The relevant disqualifying conditions under this guideline are: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
                                                          
1 Depart Counsel’s submission erroneously cites the Directive, Enclosure 2, Attachment 7, which was 
replaced by the AG on September 1, 2006. I have decided this case based on AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 and 
the whole-person concept.  
 
 5
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program; and  
 
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program; 
 
 Applicant’s arrest record and his admissions establish AG ¶ 22(a). His 
admissions establish AG ¶ 22(c). AG ¶ 22(d) is not established, because there is no 
evidence that he was diagnosed by a “duly qualified medical professional.” AG ¶ 22(e) is 
not established because there is no evidence that the qualifications of the counselor and 
clinicians during his treatment from June to August 2009 were the equivalent of a 
“licensed clinical social worker.” AG ¶ 22(f) is not fully established, because there is no 
evidence that a qualified medical professional or licensed clinical social worker made the 
diagnosis of alcohol dependence.  
 
I have noted that Applicant has admitted he is an alcoholic and that he admitted 
relapsing alcohol after completion of his treatment program in August 2009. However, 
based on the absence of evidence that Applicant was diagnosed by a “duly qualified 
medical professional,” a “licensed clinical social worker,” or the equivalent, I resolve 
SOR ¶ 1.e for Applicant. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 6
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) (“so much time has passed”) focuses on whether 
the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is 
Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). I conclude that the first prong of this mitigating condition is not established. 
Applicant has been abstinent for less than a year after a lifetime of excessive drinking. 
He relapsed after completing his alcohol treatment. Although he appears to be on the 
right path, more time is needed for him to demonstrate that he is rehabilitated. The 
remaining prongs of this mitigating condition are not established because his conduct 
was frequent, did not occur under unusual circumstances, and casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(b) is partially established, because Applicant has acknowledged that he 
is an alcoholic, and he has taken actions to overcome his problem. However the third 
prong is not established because insufficient time has passed to establish a “pattern of 
abstinence.” 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 23(d) is established by Applicant’s completion of the 
alcohol treatment program in August 2009. The remaining prongs are not established, 
however, because he has not established a pattern of abstinence and there is no 
evidence that his favorable prognosis was made by a qualified medical professional or 
the equivalent of a licensed clinical social worker. 
 
 Although I have concluded that Applicant has not abstained from alcohol for long 
enough to establish AG ¶¶ 23(a), (b), and (d), his statements that he has abstained from 
alcohol since May 2010 are uncontroverted by any evidence and are sufficient to refute 
the allegation that he continues to consume alcohol. Thus, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.f in his 
favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 7
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has had a long and apparently successful career 
with his current employer. He has held a security clearance for most of his working life. 
He appears to have finally acknowledged his problem with alcohol and taken positive 
steps to overcome it. Because Applicant requested a determination without a hearing, I 
have had no opportunity to question him, and my ability to judge his sincerity and 
credibility is limited. Based on the record, I conclude that he needs more time to 
demonstrate rehabilitation. See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.37 through E3.1.41 (reconsideration 
authorized after one year). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
