 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-08451    
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(Standard Form 86) on October 14, 2008, to request a security clearance required as 
part of his employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
 
1  
 
 
2  
                                                     
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On July 13, 2010, The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns focused on 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant submitted an undated Answer to the SOR 
dated, in which he denied three allegations (1.j., 1.w., and 1.y.) under Guideline F and 
admitted the remaining 23 allegations. He denied the 11 Guideline E allegations.  
 
The case was assigned to me on September 10, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on October 5, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 20, 
2010. During the hearing, I admitted nine government exhibits (GE), identified as GE 1 
through 9. Applicant testified and offered six documents, which I admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through F. I held the record open to allow both parties to submit 
additional evidence. Department Counsel timely submitted a relevant state statute. 
Department Counsel’s cover memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I take 
administrative notice of the submitted statute, which I mark as Hearing Exhibit II. 
Applicant timely submitted five additional documents, admitted as AE G through AE K. 
Applicant's cover letter and document list are marked as HE III. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on October 28, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, who is 48 years old, joined the Army in 1984 and was honorably 
discharged at a pay grade of E-3 in 1986. (Tr. 28-29) He married in 1990 and divorced 
in 1992. (GE 2) He has two children, 20 and 21 years old. He holds a bachelor’s degree 
in business administration. He completed a master’s degree in information system 
management in 2007. (Tr. 33-34) Over the past ten years, he has been unemployed 
periodically for a few months at a time while job-seeking, for a total of 12 to 24 months. 
(Tr. 32-33) In May 2010, he began working for his current employer, a federal 
contractor. He is the senior subject-matter expert for certification and accreditation. (Tr. 
29-31) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in 1999, which was discharged the 
same year. He has accumulated debts since that time, and his current debts appear in 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which were implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 
2 to the Directive. 
 
 
 
3  
                                                     
his credit reports of May and October 2008, and January and May 2010. (GE 5–9) 
Applicant consulted a consumer credit company in 2009. Its plan required Applicant to 
pay $1,585 per month. He decided against using the company, because it charged a 
high payment but proposed paying only negligible amounts to creditors, which the 
creditors refused to accept. He decided to pay the debts on his own. (AE H; Tr. 44-45, 
65-66, 111) 
 
 Applicant's Personal Financial Statement (PFS) of April 2010 shows a net 
monthly income of $4,224. His expenses total $3,755, leaving a monthly net remainder 
of $469. Applicant's PFS does not include payments on any of the SOR debts or other 
monthly debt payments. He does not have a savings account. His child support 
payments ended in 2008; however, his children attend college, and Applicant provides 
$400 to $500 per month to his daughters to help pay for college expenses such as 
books and fees. (GE 5; AE I; Tr. 26-27) He also pays for his mother’s medicines, 
sending her $300 to $400 per month. He makes the minimum monthly payment on his 
one credit card. As of the hearing date, he was in the process of applying for a second 
job. (Tr. 83, 110) 
 
 The SOR lists 25 debts that total $39,520. However, the actual total of the SOR 
debts is $30,605 because of payments made on the debt at allegation 1.a. Applicant 
made payments on this 2006 judgment for furniture debt through garnishments of 
approximately $400 per month between 2006 and 2008. The garnishment ended when 
the job ended in 2008. He also made two payments in September and October 2010. 
The balance has been reduced from $10,515 to $1,600. (AE A, K; Tr. 35-40) 
 
 In his interrogatory response of April 2010, Applicant stated he would set up 
payment arrangements for the 14 debts at allegations 1.d, e, g, h, k, n, o, p, q, r, s, u, v, 
and x. (GE 5) However, he did not set up a payment program for his debts. He decided 
to pay the debts individually, starting with the largest debts -- his student loans and 
federal tax debt -- because non-payment of these debts would result in garnishment of 
his pay.3 He did not contact other creditors to work out plans because he was unable to 
pay them. He plans to negotiate settlements to pay lower amounts on some debts. He 
has not bought a car so that he can have funds available to implement his plan. He 
expects his financial situation to improve within six months. He is also considering 
contacting a credit counseling company that would pay higher amounts to his creditors. 
He testified that he did not concentrate on his debts previously because he was “not 
really paying attention to what I need to do.” (Tr. 69, 112-116) 
  
 Applicant stated that the following debts were paid: 
 
Utility, $341 (allegation 1.j.) He provided no supporting documentation.  (Tr. 51-
52) 
 
3 Applicant owes federal taxes of approximately $10,000, and student loans of approximately $80,000. 
These two debts were not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 115) 
 
 
4  
Medical, $123, $50 (allegations 1.t. and 1.y.) He provided no supporting 
documentation. (Tr. 75, 79) 
 
School, $81 (allegation 1.w.) He provided no supporting documentation. (Tr. 77-
78) 
 
He disputed the following debt: 
 
State lien, $865 (allegation 1.c.) Applicant testified that this debt was paid 
through seizure of his tax refund. He provided no documentation to support this 
claim. (Tr. 42-43) 
 
 The following debts resulted in judgments filed against Applicant: 1.a. (see 
previous discussion); and allegation 1.r. for unpaid rent in the amount of $1,086. He was 
required to appear in court in February 2007 regarding this judgment for unpaid rent, but 
failed to appear because he did not have the funds to pay it. During his 2008 security 
interview, he reported the balance to be $3,000. He intended to pay the debt in January 
2009. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant resigned from a company where he was employed in 2006. He had 
signed out a company van on a Friday, but did not pick it up until Saturday. He drove it 
to his home. A third party called the local police to report that the van was being driven 
erratically on Friday. His company was notified that he was cited by police on Friday for 
his erratic driving. Applicant denied having the van on that day, or driving erratically, or 
being stopped by the police. He believes his supervisor did not like him and fabricated 
the events. Applicant was accused of stealing the van and placed on administrative 
leave. In November 2006, he decided to resign rather than fighting the accusation. 
When he completed three federal employment applications in July 2007, and April and 
October 2008, he did not disclose that he had left a job under unfavorable 
circumstances within the previous seven years. He testified that he did not understand 
the question. (GE 1, 4) 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant was involved in events that led to his arrest. The 
versions of events Applicant provided in his July and November 2008 security 
interviews differ somewhat. Both involve several strangers trying to gain entry to 
Applicant's home. He refused and brandished either a stick or a BB gun. Either 
Applicant or the strangers called the police. During a search of Applicant’s home, police 
recovered a broken BB gun. Applicant was arrested and charged with second-degree 
assault. He remained in jail for three days before being released on bail. In April 2008, 
the complainants did not appear in court, and the charge was dismissed. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in 2008, and applications 
for a public trust position in 2007 and 2008. On each of the three applications, he 
answered “No” when asked the following questions: 
 
 
 
5  
                                                     
• if he had been more than six months delinquent on any debt in the previous 
seven years;  
 
• if a tax lien had been filed against him within the previous seven years; 
 
• if a financial judgment had been filed against him within the previous seven 
years; 
 
• if he had a left a job under unfavorable circumstances in the previous seven 
years. 
 
On the 2008 security clearance application, he also denied 
  
• that he was ever charged with or convicted of a felony offense, or  
 
• that he currently had debts that were more than 90 days past due.  
 
 Applicant had a security interview in July 2008, after completing the two public 
trust position applications. Other than one debt for unpaid rent, he did not discuss his 
delinquencies. A special interview was conducted in November 2008 to discuss the 
multiple delinquencies that the security investigation disclosed. (GE 4) He also told the 
investigator that he resigned from the job because he did not get along with the staff. As 
to his judgments, he was paying the judgment resulting from the furniture debt, so did 
not consider it to still be a judgment. He also stated he was not fully aware of his 
delinquencies, but did not think any were currently more than 90 days delinquent, or 
had been 180 days past due within the previous seven years. He admitted at the 
hearing that he did not list the debts that he owed because he had not obtained his 
credit report.  He testified that he did not disclose his resignation because he did not 
understand the question. (Tr. 87-91, 95-107) 
 
 Applicant submitted the first public trust position application in July 2007. He was 
charged with assault in five months later, in December 2007. The charge was dismissed 
in April 2008. On April 15, 2008, he completed his second public trust application, and 
he listed the assault charge. Six months later, in October 2008, he completed a security 
clearance application, which asked if he had ever been charged with a felony; he did not 
list the assault charge. He testified that he did not deliberately falsify the security 
clearance application; he believed he was not required to list it because it had been 
dismissed at that time. (GE 4, p 5; Tr. 91-93)  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
4 Directive 6.3 
 
 
 
6  
                                                     
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or his 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
An individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead 
to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
known sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The SOR 
alleges more than $39,000 in debts. The oldest of the debts were incurred in 1994. Most 
remain unpaid. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control: and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant's debts started accruing in the mid-1990s. Delinquencies have 
continued, and most of the debts in the SOR remain unpaid. As of the date of the SOR, 
he had more than 25 delinquencies. His debts are both frequent and recent. His failure 
to work on resolving his debts raises questions about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) involves financial problems stemming from unexpected events 
beyond an applicant's control. Here, there is no record evidence that Applicant suffered 
unforeseen events that affected his ability to pay his debts such as a costly divorce, or 
significant medical expenses. He has had intermittent periods of unemployment, but it 
does not appear to be extensive or persistent. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant was on notice that delinquent debts were a security concern after he 
completed three applications in 2007 and 2008. He was reminded that debts were a 
security concern when he met with an investigator in 2008. He talked with a debt 
resolution company in 2009, but did not hire the company because it did not allocate 
enough of his payment to the creditors. Applicant claims that some debts were paid, but 
did not provide evidence to support his claim. He substantially reduced the largest debt 
 
 
8  
of $10,000 to $1,600, but it cannot be considered a good-faith effort because it was 
accomplished through garnishment of his pay rather than his own initiative. His financial 
situation is not under control. Moreover, his lack of action over the past three years, 
despite his awareness that his debts were a security issue since at least 2007, does not 
support a finding of a good-faith effort. AG ¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
(a) Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose a felony 
charge, his job termination, and financial delinquencies. The allegations implicate the 
following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
 Applicant was accused by his employer of theft of a company vehicle. He 
testified that he did not steal the vehicle. Ultimately, he resigned from the company 
because of what he believed were false accusations. On three federal job applications 
between July 2007 and October 2008, Applicant did not disclose that he left this job 
under unfavorable circumstances. Applicant did not disclose his past-due debts on 
either the 2007 or 2008 public trust applications, or on the 2008 security clearance 
application. His testimony he was not fully aware of his delinquencies, and that he did 
not think any were currently more than 90 days delinquent, or had been 180 days past-
due within the previous seven years was not credible. Given the length of time his debts 
were delinquent, he was well aware that he had outstanding balances for several years. 
AG ¶ 16 (a) applies. 
 
As to mitigation, the following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
9  
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Applicant disclosed the assault charge on his application completed in April 
2008, when he was asked if he had been charged with any offense in the previous 
seven years. He did not disclose it in October 2008, when the question asked if he had 
ever been charged with a felony. Because he disclosed the charge in the earlier 
application, I conclude that Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose it subsequently, 
but believed he was not required to do so once it had been dismissed.  
 
However, Applicant did not disclose his numerous delinquencies, although he 
had been required to list them on three separate applications. In addition, there is no 
evidence that Applicant informed any authorized government official that he wished to 
correct the answers on his applications. AG ¶17(a) cannot be applied. AG ¶17(c) is also 
inapplicable. Applicant’s conduct cannot be considered minor because he failed to be 
forthright with the government not once, but on numerous questions in the 2007 and 
2008 applications. His conduct casts doubt on his current trustworthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate guidelines, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant is a well-educated and mature man who has accomplished laudable 
goals in completing an advanced degree and assisting his two children with their college 
expenses. However, he has accumulated substantial debts since the mid-1990s, 
including a state tax lien, a federal tax debt, and numerous credit card, rent, and utility 
debts. He made some effort by contacting a consumer credit agency within the past 
 
 
10  
year, but did not retain the company. His decision not to retain the company may have 
been legitimate, but the key is that he has not set up another payment plan in its place. 
He has had three years since he was first on notice that his debts were an issue, and 
has shown little substantive debt resolution during that period. He has a general plan to 
resolve debts starting with the IRS and school loans, but he admits he has not done 
what he should have in regard to his debts. Moreover, his claim that he did not 
understand the questions on the applications is not credible. Taken together, his lack of 
effort over the past several years on his debts, combined with his failure to disclose to 
the Government his resignation and the extent of his financial indebtedness, raise 
doubts about his good judgment and trustworthiness.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
currently raised about his suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.z.  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.c. – 2.k.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
