1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04794
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On March 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In an April 28, 2010, response, Applicant admitted in part the allegation raised
under SOR allegation ¶1.a, and admitted five of nine allegations set forth under SOR
allegations ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j under Guideline F. She also requested a hearing before a
DOHA administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on September 10, 2010.
The parties proposed a hearing date of October 28, 2010. A notice setting that date for
the hearing was issued on September 30, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Applicant gave testimony and offered one document, which was accepted into
the record without objection as exhibit (Ex.) A. She was given through November 29,
2010, to submit any additional documents. The Government introduced 14 documents,
 Tr. 18.      1
2
which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. 1-14. The transcript (Tr.)
of the proceeding was received on November 8, 2010. On November 15, 2010,
Applicant provided Department Counsel with six additional documents, which were
accepted into the record without objection as Exs. B-G and the record was closed. At
Department Counsel’s  request, the record was reopened on February 8, 2011, for the
inclusion of an additional document submitted by Applicant. That document was
accepted without objection as Ex. H and the record was again closed. Based on a
review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant met her burden of
mitigating security concerns related to financial considerations. Clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old production line employee who has worked for the
same government contractor since May 2009. She is married. Applicant earned a high
school diploma and has completed some college-level courses.
In April 2001, Applicant bought a small restaurant, which she also managed. The
investment seemed to work out well when it immediately became a success. At that
time, Applicant’s husband was an independent trucker with his own tractor trailer. By
2002, however, an unexpected rise in petrol prices and a leaner economy adversely
affected his business, which had been providing him with a net income of about
$50,000 a year.  He ultimately lost his truck through repossession and was unemployed1
for a few months, during which time Applicant and her husband relied on the
restaurant’s income to meet their expenses. Job opportunities were limited in their rural
community of residence. Applicant’s husband ultimately accepted work as a truck driver
earning about $30,000 a year. 
The couple continued on a significantly reduced joint income. By 2005,
Applicant’s restaurant business began to decline in response to leaner times. Her
husband had not yet found a higher paying job in their region. As a result of these
conditions, Applicant and her husband could not meet their joint monthly obligations,
and her husband was unable to maintain payments on his truck-related balance, which
was a debt solely in his name. They tried to seek Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, but
were told they would have to explore a wage earner plan. They then sought Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection.
Included in the couple’s joint 2005 Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition were the debts
found at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a.1 – 1.a.6. That action was ultimately dismissed. Today,
Applicant has little recollection of the filing or the debts noted therein. Those debts
included:
 Tr. 21-22.      2
 Tr. 22.      3
 Ths sum includes costs, interest, and fees. See Tr. 23.      4
 Tr. 23; Ex. A (Payoff Report, dated Oct. 31, 2010).      5
 Id.      6
 Tr. 22, 25.      7
 Tr. 24.      8
 Tr. 25.      9
 Id. As previously noted, these debts are from Applicant’s bankruptcy petition and are no longer reflected      10
on her credit report.
 Id.      11
 Tr. 26.      12
3
1.a.1 – Unpaid debt for $4,281 – Applicant is unsure of the origin of this disputed
account.  It is no longer reflected on Applicant’s credit report.2 3
1.a.2 – Unpaid debt for $49,011  – This debt was created from Applicant’s4
husband’s loss of his tractor-trailer for a balance of about $39,000. It was purchased
solely in his name and was not a joint obligation. To date, approximately $25,000 has
been paid toward this balance.   Applicant’s husband generally has been in regular5
repayment on this debt since 2006. The evidence shows that the obligation belongs
solely to Applicant’s husband and is not jointly Applicant’s responsibility.  The SOR’s6
source for this debt is Applicant’s joint bankruptcy petition.  This debt was included in7
that petition on the husband’s behalf as a matter of administrative convenience.
1.a.3 – Debt for $2,158 – Applicant believes this debt may have been created for
the purchase of appliances.   She recalls making payments on some appliances in the8
mid-2000s, but does not remember whether she or her husband  satisfied the debt. She
testified she was never again contacted about a debt to an appliance merchant and has
no recollection of the debt.
1.a.4 – Debt for $2,880 – Applicant believes this debt was for a credit card
balance that was previously paid.  She no longer has any documentation regarding the9
account, noting it “would have been [from] years, years, years ago.”   10
1.a.5 – Debt for $3,414 – This debt is for her husband’s personal account with a
home improvement center.  It is not a joint account. It was included on their joint11
bankruptcy petition as a matter of administrative convenience.
1.a.6 – Debt for $23 – There is no information regarding this account.  In her12
response to the SOR, Applicant denied knowledge of and responsibility for this debt.  
 Tr. 46.      13
 Tr. 48.      14
 Tr. 46-48.      15
 Tr.26-27.      16
 Tr. Ex. E (State tax balance owed correspondence, dated Nov.5, 2010); Ex. F (Lien information letter,      17
dated Aug. 20, 2010).
 Tr. 31.      18
4
By the late 2000s, a declining economy continued to adversely affect their part of
the country. As a result, the restaurant started failing. In January 2008, Applicant sold
the restaurant for about $20,000. This gave her sufficient funds to satisfy the business’
back rent and other obligations. No notable monetary gain was derived from the sale.
The only business debts remaining after the restaurant’s sale were for a 2006 state tax
lien and a nominal telephone balance, of which she was then unaware. About a year
later, Applicant’s husband received clearance for hauling hazardous materials.
After selling her restaurant in 2008, Applicant held multiple low-paying, hourly-
wage jobs until starting her present position as a production line worker. Her husband
has since found work transporting hazardous materials. His current salary is about
$58,000 a year. 
In the past few years, Applicant’s husband has suffered from kidney stones. He
incurred about $9,000 in medical bills in 2009. Although he has some medical
insurance, his coverage is minimal.  During the weeks he was suffering from kidney13
stones in 2009, he was unable to work and derived no income. In his trucking job, he
does not accrue medical leave.  In addition, Applicant has faced multiple medical14
issues in the past few years, including a hysterectomy, treatment for Grave’s disease,
and radiation treatments for a thyroid condition. Each procedure demanded time off
from her hourly wage employment situations. Treatment for these conditions also cost
Applicant a considerable sum despite limited health insurance coverage.  15
Aside from the debts noted in Applicant’s dismissed bankruptcy petition, the
SOR contains allegations about nine other debts.
1.b – Judgment for medical provider for $162 – Applicant testified that this debt
was previously paid, but is unable to find evidence it has been paid.   16
1.c – State tax lien from 2006 for $11,033 – Applicant has been in timely
repayment on this debt for several years. The balance, as of November 5, 2010, was
$4,825.  17
1.d – State tax lien from 2008 for $4,836 – Applicant denies this allegation. She
believes this reference is to a 2004 tax debt that has since been paid.  She showed18
 Tr. 36.      19
 Tr. 43.      20
 Tr. 44.      21
 Id.      22
 Ex. D (IRS letter, dated Sep. 29, 2010).      23
 Tr. 38.      24
 Ex. H at 2 (Payoff calculator, dated Feb. 4, 2011).      25
 Id.at 3 (IRS stamped check).      26
5
that her only currently outstanding state tax lien is an account noted above at 1.c.19
Correspondence about that lien makes no reference to any other outstanding tax liens.
`           1.e – Collection account for medical services for $583 – Applicant acknowledges
this debt for recent medical care, which she hopes to satisfy when her tax debts are
paid.
1.f – Mortgage debt for $19,787 – This debt is for a second mortgage. Applicant
became past due on this account in mid-2009, not long before she started her present
position and her household income was limited. While Applicant remained current on
their primary mortgage, she and her husband could not make timely payments on this
account. Applicant has worked with the lender. The lender has not pursued action
against her. Applicant plans on devoting the money now being paid to satisfy her state
and federal tax lien toward this account when the liens are satisfied.   20
1.g – Telecommunications debt for $93 – This balance, owed on the former
restaurant’s telephone service, remains unpaid.21
1.h – Utility debt for $753 – This balance is for an electric bill. Applicant has
made repayment arrangements on which payments are made, but the balance has yet
to be satisfied.   22
1.i – Federal tax lien for $5,901 – Now paid in full, Applicant was in repayment on
this lien for past due joint income tax balances, dating from about 2005.  At the time of23
the hearing, the balance owed was approximately $2,728.  She made monthly24
payments of $500 through payroll deduction. She planned to have the debt paid by
March 2011.  After the hearing, Applicant submitted evidence that the balance had
been reduced to $953.48.  On February 4, 2011, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)25
received her personal check for $953.48 to totally satisfy this debt.   26
 Tr. 44-45.      27
 Tr. 49.      28
6
1.j – Medical collection account for $26 – Applicant cannot identify this debt and
disputes the debt.  The Government does not dispute Applicant’s assertion that this27
account is not hers.  28
Applicant has tried to use an organized approach in repaying her debts. Her
strategy in addressing her debts has been to pay off her state and federal tax liens first,
then use that money to satisfy her remaining balances. With her federal tax lien now
paid, that $500 a month will now be applied to her mortgage debt, noted at 1.f, above.
Money now devoted to her state tax lien is to be expended on other balances when that
debt is satisfied. She stresses the facts that some of the debts at issue in the
bankruptcy petition were solely her husband’s debts, are not her obligations, and are
being addressed by her husband. Applicant and her husband live simply and do not live
beyond their means. There is no evidence of extravagant living or expenses, nor is
there a suggestion that Applicant has purposefully or negligently neglected her
obligations. Job opportunities are limited in their region, an area particularly hard hit by
current economic conditions. Applicant acknowledges that her income is low, but
stresses that she is trying to honor her debts to the fullest extent possible. She is
making progress as speedily as she can, given their household income.       
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      29
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      30
 Id.      31
 Id.      32
 AG ¶ 18.      33
 Id.      34
7
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a29
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  30
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access31
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.32
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is  the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It33
also states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”  Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy petition and a34
 Even if Applicant were to be held personally liable for her husband’s individually-incurred tractor-related      35
debt (SOR allegation ¶ 1.a.2), it is notable that approximately $25,000 has been paid toward the original
obligation of about $39,000 through regular payments. 
8
recent credit report reflect that Applicant has several delinquent debts, including state
and federal tax liens. While some of the debts noted were shown to be solely the
obligation of her husband, there is sufficient evidence to raise Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate
security concerns. 
While significant progress has been made with regard to Applicant’s tax-related
debts, and although the largest debt attributed to Applicant was shown to belong to her
husband for his tractor-trailer, several debts remain unaddressed.  Moreover, no35
evidence was introduced showing local economic conditions are on the mend or that
such conditions will not adversely affect Applicant again in the future. While Applicant’s
evidence discerns which debts are rightly hers, as opposed to her husband’s, and while
it shows a deliberate strategy of first satisfying her tax liens before addressing any other
creditors, there is insufficient evidence to raise Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
Applicant’s debts – as well as those acquired independently by her husband –
were largely created by a souring national economy and its effects on an already
depressed region. Such factors led to her husband’s loss of his tractor trailer, period of
unemployment, and ultimate acceptance of a significantly lower paying job. It also
contributed to the decline of her restaurant’s business. Compounding their financial
difficulties were recent medical problems and unpaid leave from work to address those
medical issues. The evidence suggests, however, that the planned bankruptcy filing,
Applicant’s efforts to address her tax liens, and her husband’s efforts to address his
automotive debt were initiated at various points during their period of their financial
difficulties. Such facts are sufficient to raise FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
Although Applicant has approached her debts with a clear strategy that aimed at
first satisfying her tax debts, she has not received formal financial counseling.
Therefore, FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control) does not apply. 
Applicant showed that nearly half of the debt attributed to her is actually debt for
which her husband is solely responsible (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a.2 and 1.a.5). It was
attributed to her in the SOR because those debts were noted in a dismissed bankruptcy
petition, through which husband and wife once contemplated joint bankruptcy protection
9
as a matter of administrative convenience and documentary consolidation. Nearly half
of the debt genuinely owed by Applicant is tax related (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and
1.i). She has made payment of these obligations a priority. Applicant has been in
repayment on her state tax obligation and recently satisfied her federal tax debt. With
her federal tax debt now paid, she is poised to devote her $500 monthly payments to
her second mortgage. When her state tax balance is satisfied, she is prepared to direct
her current payments toward the remainder of her debts. Given her strategy, her efforts,
and her demonstrated commitment to honor her debts, FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts) applies. None of the other FC MCs apply.
The burden for mitigation in these proceedings is placed squarely on Applicant.
This case is not one of an individual living beyond her means, investing in risky
ventures, or failing to understand basic personal finance. Applicant presented unique
facts and adequate evidence sufficiently mitigating the creation of the debts at issue.
More importantly, she demonstrated an organized, methodical approach to addressing
the delinquent debts created. To date, a majority of the debt at issue has been shown
as either paid or as severable debts belonging solely to her husband. She provided
evidence of successful repayment strategies on the largest debts at issue, as well as
efforts to address her debt that significantly predate the issuance of the SOR. While
debts remain, she maintains a simple lifestyle. Moreover, her repayment strategy has
been proportionate with her income, effective, and earnest. There is no evidence to
suggest she will discontinue her efforts. The AG does not require that all one’s
delinquent debts must be paid. It only requires that an applicant establish a reasonable
plan to resolve the debts, and that the applicant has taken meaningful actions to
implement the plan. Here, Applicant has shown a holistic, workable, and successful
approach to addressing her debts that is rationally commensurate to her income. I find
that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. In addition, what constitutes reasonable behavior in such cases,
as contemplated by FC MC ¶ 20(b), depends on the specific facts in a given case. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a highly credible and candid 47-year-old production line employee
who has worked for the same government contractor since May 2009. Despite her
education and her past success in business, she sought her present position in reaction
to adverse economic conditions that caused her to sell her restaurant during a period
when her husband was recovering from his own professional set-backs. While both
aimed to stabilize their household finances and secure stable employment in their
10
depressed locality, both Applicant and her husband faced recent medical issues that
and were costly and demanded time off from work without pay. Despite these set-
backs, progress on Applicant’s debts has been made.
Applicant showed that about half of the debts attributed to her are the sole
obligation of her husband, and that his largest debt is in timely repayment. Of the
remaining half of the debt cited, Applicant demonstrated that she is in timely repayment
on the only state tax lien referenced by her state in its correspondence with Applicant,
and provided evidence that she has remitted full payment for her federal tax lien. With
nearly three-quarters of the debt at issue thus addressed, she is now poised to devote
the $500 monthly payments previously paid to the federal government for taxes toward
her second mortgage. She has a plan in place to similarly redirect sums now paid to the
state for taxes toward the remainder of her debts, which are for more modest sums. 
Given Applicant’s current job, her husband’s work, and their locality of residence,
such progress is commensurate with their available resources and compatible with their
austere lifestyle. There is no evidence that they enjoy extravagances or pay for
unnecessary services. Rather, Applicant provided frank and earnest testimony
reflecting her genuine intention to honor her debts as expediently as practicable. She
continues to express her commitment to satisfying her debts and has the resources to
do so. At no time has she demonstrated a lackadaisical attitude toward her financial
woes or exhibited a lack of diligence, despite physical and professional setbacks.
Overall, Applicant has acted responsibly given her limited resources. I have no
concerns that she will fail to honor her remaining debts. Consequently, I conclude that
under these unique facts, Applicant exhibited responsible behavior, as contemplated by
FC MC ¶ 20(b). Given all these considerations, there is sufficient evidence to mitigate
Guideline F security concerns. Clearance is granted.       
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
