                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-08430 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns for Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on August 4, 2009. On May 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2010, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated August 30, 2010, was provided to her by cover letter dated 
September 2, 2010. Applicant received her copy of the FORM on September 8, 2010. 
She was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to submit any objections, 
and information in mitigation or extenuation. She did submit additional information within 
the 30 day period. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1c – 1f, 1h, 1j – 1l, 1o, 1r, 1t – 1u, 1w – 1x, and 1aa. 
She denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old graphic artist and designer, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since September 2008.1 Information contained in the FORM 
indicates that she has taken college courses part-time “off and on” from 1990 to 1996. 
(Item 7.) She does not have a college degree. Applicant married her husband in 
October 1998 and does not report having any dependents. She is a first-time applicant 
for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 29 debts, of which 7 are judgments. The other 22 debts 
include collections, charged-off and past-due accounts. The total amount of debt 
alleged is $30,244. These delinquent debts are substantiated by Applicant’s August 
2009 e-QIP; her November 2008, August 2009, and March 2010 credit reports; her 
February 2010 response to interrogatories; and reports of public records. Her record of 
indebtedness began as early as 2003 and has been ongoing. (Items 4 – 10.) In 
Applicant’s June 2010 SOR response, she stated: “The debts that I have denied are 
ones I feel I have paid off or are incorrectly posted to my credit report.” (Item 2.) 
Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence in her SOR response or in her 
response to FORM substantiating her claim of debts that she denied were paid off or 
incorrect.2 (Item 2, Response to SOR.) However, Applicant’s March 2010 credit report 
 
1 Background information is derived from Applicant’s e-QIP unless otherwise stated. 
 
2 Department Counsel addressed various shortcomings in Applicant’s June 2010 SOR Answer, in 
particular, her lack of documentation for debts she claimed were resolved. Applicant did not address the 
lack of documentation issue in her Response to FORM. She did include a three page narrative, a copy of 
her June 2010 Social Security Statement, a copy of a September 2010 cashier’s check in the amount of 
$629 to a creditor, a copy of three receipts to a creditor, a copy of September 2010 correspondence to 
her Congresswoman asking for assistance with her security clearance, a September 2010 Contractor’s 
Progress, Status, and Management Report, and a September 2010 bank statement reflecting four 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
indicates that the judgment debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1b and 1z are satisfied. (Item 10.) 
There is no comparable evidence in the record to refute the other delinquent debts 
alleged. And, as noted in fn 2, Applicant’s additional evidence submitted in her 
Response to FORM is of little help identifying SOR creditors, if in fact, they are SOR 
creditors. 
 
In Applicant’s February 2010 interrogatory response, she indicated that: (1) she 
was diagnosed with cancer requiring nine surgeries causing her to miss work and 
ultimately lose her job in the time period of 2003 to 2004; and (2) her husband had a 
heart attack in June 2004 and fell from a ladder at home in December 2006 and broke 
his neck, also resulting in his loss of work. (Item 7.) Applicant reported periods of 
unemployment from February to August 2004, from January to February 2006, and from 
February to March 2007. (Item 4.) Applicant also sought financial counseling from 
March 2008 to July 2008. She reported paying $3,000 in six payments of $500 to the 
company providing financial counseling for credit repair and to have some of their 
outstanding accounts settled. Her recent credit report does not reflect a positive change 
in her financial situation. Applicant believes she was “scammed” during this process. 
(Item 7.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement submitted in February 2010 reflects a 
net monthly income of $4,511.60 and total monthly expenses of $3,815. (Net remainder 
is $696.60.) She also lists a $700 monthly car payment as a monthly debt and it is 
unclear whether this amount is included in her monthly expenses. (Item 8.) If her car 
payment is not included in her monthly expenses, she would have a negative net 
monthly remainder. Applicant did not address this discrepancy in her Response to 
FORM. Applicant repeated throughout this process that she intends to pay her debts. 
(SOR Response, Items 7 and 8, Response to FORM.) 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
payments to a creditor. Unfortunately, Applicant did not indicate on any of the documents purporting to 
pay bills what SOR creditor, if any, was being addressed.   
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
 
5 
 
 
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Since approximately 2003, Applicant accumulated at least 29 separate debts 
totaling just over $30,000. Seven of those debts are judgments. Her history of 
indebtedness is well documented. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence precludes full application of these 
mitigating conditions except for AG ¶ 20(b). Furthermore, if approximately one-half of 
her debts were resolved as she claims, she failed to provide documentation 
substantiating her claim. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to 
show they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do 
cast doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented evidence to establish circumstances beyond her control 
contributing to her inability to pay her debts. Such circumstances include her 
 
6 
 
 
unemployment following her cancer diagnosis in 2002 and her three periods of 
unemployment in 2004, 2006, and 2007. Additionally, her husband had a heart attack in 
2004, sustained a broken neck in 2006, and lost work. These events are most 
unfortunate and significant. Applicant asserts that she was doing the best she could 
under the circumstances to pay down her debts and remain financially solvent. AG ¶ 
20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(c). In 2008, she participated in 
financial counseling, but there is no evidence that her financial situation improved. For 
this mitigating condition to apply, an Applicant must show there are clear indications that 
the problem is being resolved or is under control. From the evidence presented, 
Applicant’s financial situation is not being resolved and is not under control. 
 
 Considering the number of delinquent debts, the date the debts were acquired, 
the aggregate value of the debts, and the lack of documentary evidence of efforts to 
resolve her financial obligations, Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that 
her financial problems are unlikely to recur. The AGs ¶¶ 20(d) and (e) are not 
reasonably supported by Applicant’s evidence. She did not submit sufficient 
documentary evidence of correspondence or similar evidence to show a good-faith 
effort on her part to repay her creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. I am unable to 
connect what little documentary evidence she submitted in Response to FORM with any 
debts alleged. Applicant’s claim that approximately one-half of the debts alleged are not 
valid or have been paid or settled is unsubstantiated. Again, she has not submitted 
documented proof to support her claim that her disputed debts are not valid. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my analysis under  Guideline F. 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for her 
work history and work as a government contractor. These factors show a level of 
responsibility.  
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant has failed to show good-faith efforts to 
resolve her financial problems in a timely manner. The sparse mitigating record 
evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. In 
fairness to the Applicant, she may well have resolved one-half of her debts and she may 
be on the road to recovery. However, with the evidence she submitted she failed to 
demonstrate that she has achieved financial responsibility. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1a:      Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1b:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1c – 1y:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1z:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1aa – 1cc:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
