                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05060
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, items, and legal arguments in the case
file, Applicant does not mitigate drug involvement security concerns. Clearance is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) issued by the Department
of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 3, 2009, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
2
Material (FORM) on April 19, 2010, and did not respond with any information within the
30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on July 16, 2010.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana with various
frequency from about 1994 (high school) to at least November 2008; (b) used cocaine
with varying frequency from about 2003 or 2004 to at least July 2007; (c) used Valium
without a prescription in about 2008; (d) used Ecstasy in at least 2009; (e) declined to
swear against future drug use (as of September 2009); (f) engaged in the use of illegal
drugs with his spouse; and (g) been the recipient of drugs purchased by his spouse for
his use.  The allegations covered by Guideline H are incorporated under Guideline E.  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the drug-related allegations, but
denied his drug admissions reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness to
comply with rules. He claimed he no longer used illegal drugs after September 2009,
but acknowledged the possibility he could return to drug use.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
                                  
Applicant has been married to his spouse since January 2005. (Item 4) He has
no children from this marriage, and has no prior military service. (Item 4) 
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in high school.  Since high school, he has
smoked the drug once or twice a year.  When he does smoke, he typically smokes it in
a glass bowl and inhales it once or twice at each party he attends with his spouse. (Item
6) Marijuana makes him feel mellow. Although he has no immediate interest in
resuming his use in the future, he cannot rule it out in the future.  
Applicant turned to snorting cocaine at parties in the 2003 time frame. (Item 6)
He attended these parties with his spouse on numerous occasions between 2003 and
July 2007. (Item 6) He recollects snorting cocaine in powder form once or twice a year
between 2003 or 2004 and July 2007. (Item 6) He last snorted cocaine in his own
residence with his spouse in July 2007.  All of his contacts at the parties he attended
were arranged by his wife, who knew some of the contact persons through her work.
(Item 6)  
During a flight with his wife in 2008 to visit her parents, Applicant’s wife gave him
two non-prescribed Valium tablets to calm his anxieties. (Item 6) Applicant split these
two tablets into four halves and used them on both his outgoing flight and his return
flight.  These Valium tablets made him drowsy.  Since this round trip flight, he has not
used Valium, or any non-prescribed drug.
3
In January 2009, Applicant used some Ecstasy powder at a band concert that his
spouse purchased and gave him. (Item 6) This Ecstasy made him feel “fuzzy” and
“gave his body a buzz.” (Item 6) He used the drug on this one occasion, and has no
intention of using it again.  Albeit, he cannot “swear that the opportunity might not arise
again” when he could use it. (Item 6)
To date, Applicant has made no attempt to consciously quit using illegal drugs.
He has used them before “when he decides to, and not before.” (Item 6) He has not
sought any treatment for drug use, and has never been diagnosed or treated for the
use of illegal drugs. (Item 6).  Nor has he ever received a positive drug test.  
Although he was afforded an opportunity to supplement the record, Applicant
provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf. Nor did he
provide any proof of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
4
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
5
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Between 1994 and November 2008, Applicant used marijuana recurrently.
Later (between 2002 and July 2007) he turned to using cocaine with his wife at
parties.  And he tried non-prescribed Valium on one occasion in 2008 to quiet his
anxieties in air travel with his wife, and the drug Ecstasy on at least one occasion at a
concert in 2009.  Applicant’s wife purchased illegal drugs for him from time to time. 
Over an extensive period, Applicant used marijuana and other drugs
contemporaneously on a virtually continuous basis. While he has not used marijuana
since November 2008, or any illegal drugs since 2009, he has declined to commit to
never using it in the future. With so much recurrent use of his own, and continuous
use of his spouse, too much doubt and uncertainty exist to make safe predictable
judgments about his ability to avoid recurrent drug involvement. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions of
the Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug
abuse,” DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,”
and DC ¶ 25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.”  Afforded an opportunity to respond to
the FORM materials, Applicant did not reply. 
Judgment concerns exist over Applicant’s continued drug use reflect both
serious judgment lapses and disregard of the DoD’s rules and policies for current and
prospective clearance holders. Applicant’s actions are expressly covered by Guideline
E, and are entitled to independent cognizance under this Guideline according to the
Appeal Board.  See ISCR Case No. 06-20964, at 6 (April 10, 2008).  Where (as here)
there is additional probative adverse information covered by Guideline E that is not
covered by Guideline H, and vice versa, which reflects a recurring pattern of
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or emotionally unstable behavior, independent
grounds do exist for considering questionable judgment and trustworthiness
allegations under Guideline E, as well as Guideline H.  Authority for considering
overlapping conduct under both Guidelines is contained in the guidance provided in
Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(d) of the Directive’s August 2006 amendments. 
So, under Guideline E, core judgment and trustworthiness concerns covered by
D.C. ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
6
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information,” are applicable in
this case
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established no independent
probative evidence in this record to warrant any different conclusions under the whole-
person concept in the Directive.  He has provided no endorsements from supervisors
and coworkers with his employer to soften or mitigate any of the drug and judgment
concerns associated with his ongoing use of marijuana. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
drug use and judgment lapses, Applicant does not mitigate security concerns related
to his drug use and personal conduct issues. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by Guidelines H and E.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):         AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1.g: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         AGAINST APPLICANT    
Subparagraph. 2.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
