KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not raise an issue of harmful error.  His new evidence cannot be
considered upon appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-00955a.red
DATE: 02/10/2011
DATE: February 10, 2011
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-00955
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 9, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On November 30, 2010, after considering
the record, Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
In this case, Applicant did not file a response to the Government’s file of relevant material.
His appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Rather, it contains
new evidence, in the form of documents relating to Applicant’s participation in a debt repayment
plan in 2008, his receipt of unemployment compensation, his negotiation of a payment plan for one
of his debts in January 2011, and an unexplained IRS notice for the year 2007.
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error
on the part of the Judge.   Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security
clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
