                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:      ) 
     ) 
   )      ADP Case No. 10-01446 
      ) 
     ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position     ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
On September 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant’s answered the SOR in writing on October 5, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I was assigned the case on December 7, 2010. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
DOHA issued the Notice of Appearance on December 8, 2010. The case was 
scheduled for January 18, 2011. Due to inclement weather, the case was postponed 
until January 20, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The Government also offered Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I for demonstrative purposes. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She offered 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
was held open to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide additional documents, which 
she did. They were marked as AE C through H and were admitted into the record 
without objections.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2011.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel noted that there was a mistake on the SOR. It did not 
include a paragraph “1.i” but skipped to “1.k.” Instead of relettering the entire SOR, it 
was agreed that it would remain as written. Applicant’s answer was relettered to reflect 
accurate answers to the correct allegations.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s SOR answer, she admitted the allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 
1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n. and 1.o. She denied ¶¶ 1.f, 1g, 1.h and 1.m. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She is a college graduate and has earned several 
certifications that are job-related. She has two children, ages 13 and 8. She married in 
1998. Her husband was a citizen of Nigeria, residing in the United States. They 
separated in September 2004, and their divorce was finalized in 2007. Her ex-husband 
returned to Nigeria and does not pay child support.2  
 
 Sometime in 2004, Applicant’s husband withdrew all of their savings, which was 
about $9,000, from their joint account. The townhouse where Applicant and her children 
were living was in her husband’s name. She stated that he sold the townhouse without 
telling her. She stated she did not discover it had been sold until she received an 
eviction notice in March 2005. They had two cars. He took the car that was paid off and 
left her with the car that was financed. Her car was a 2001 and she traded it in August 
or September 2005. She purchased a new car and financed it for about $14,000. She 
stated she was unaware in August or September 2005, almost a year after her 
separation, that her savings account was empty. She stated she found out about the 
depleted savings account, after she purchased the new car and realized she did not 
have money to pay for the car. She made the first monthly payment on the new car, and 
then returned it to the dealer. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($11,988) is the car debt. Applicant 
has not contacted the creditor. She stated she was offered a settlement of $4,000 about 
1 HE II is the Government’s response to Applicant’s exhibits. The Government had no objections. 
 
2 Tr.29-34. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
a year ago, but did not accept it or make any other arrangements to resolve or pay the 
debt. Applicant then purchased a 1998 used vehicle that she used until 2006, when it 
was damaged in an accident. Applicant subsequently purchased a 2001 vehicle for 
$16,000, and has monthly car payments of $314.3  
 
 Applicant has been steadily employed since 2004. She was earning 
approximately $40,000 to $50,000 annually from 2004 to 2005; and for about 13 months 
from 2005 to 2007 she earned approximately $50,000. In 2007, she began work with 
her present employer, a defense contractor and earned $58,000. Her current annual 
salary is $66,000. When she was married, her husband worked from 1999 to 2002, but 
was in and out of work from 2002 to 2004. He did not provide her any child support after 
he left.4 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b ($150 and $151) are medical debts. Applicant 
plans on paying these debts with her income tax refund. She stated she contacted the 
creditor in August 2010. In Applicant’s post-hearing document, she stated she has 
made payment arrangements with the creditor to begin payments on February 4, 2011.5 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($100), 1.d ($100), and 1.e ($100) are medical debts to 
the same creditor. Applicant stated she made arrangements to pay the debts with the 
creditor in August 2010. She agreed to begin paying $25 a month. She made a payment 
of $25 in September or October 2010, and another in November 2010. She did not 
make a payment in December 2010 or January 2011. She stated she intended to make 
a payment in January 2011. She missed the monthly payments because she did not 
have the money. In her post-hearing submission, she provided proof she made a $25 
payment in May 2010 and July 2010, and a $50 payment in November 2010.6 
 
 Applicant stated she paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($734). She did not recall what 
the debt was for. She did not provide proof of payment.7  
 
 Applicant settled the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($217). She provided a receipt dated 
September 29, 2010.8 Applicant provided a post-hearing document for a debt with a 
different creditor’s name, with the same balance as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. It is unclear if 
this is the same debt. The debt alleged is paid.9 
3 Tr. 34-59. 
 
4 Tr. 59-70. 
 
5 Tr. 71-81; AE D, E. 
 
6 Tr. 81-86; AE D, G, H. 
 
7 Tr. 87-89. 
 
8 Answer to SOR.  
 
9 Tr. 89-90; Answer to SOR, AE D, F. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($944) stating she paid a settlement 
amount to resolve the debt in 2005. She stated she disputed the debt on her credit 
bureau report. In her post-hearing document, she stated she contacted the creditor and 
advised them she would “like to settle the debt and make payments after clearing up 
other items.”10 The debt remains unresolved.11 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k ($250 and $500) are to the same creditor for 
checks written on an account with nonsufficient funds. These checks were written to the 
car dealer after Applicant purchased her new car in 2005. She stated she contacted the 
creditor at the time and was advised that she owed the money. Applicant did not pay the 
debts and they went to collection. The debts are unpaid and unresolved.12 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($870) is for a credit card. Applicant stated she contacted 
the creditor in September 2010, and was told they had no record of the debt. She stated 
she paid the debt. She stated she disputed the debt with the credit bureau and had 
documentation. She did not provide supporting documents.13 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n ($537) is for telephone services. Applicant stated she 
currently has an account with the same company. She stated she contacted the creditor 
and they were unaware of the debt. She has not disputed the debt with the credit 
bureau. She did not provide supporting documentation.14  
 
 Applicant stated in September 2010, she contacted the creditor for the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.o ($170). She stated she made arrangements to pay $25 a month beginning in 
November 2010. She made a payment in November 2010 and did not make a payment 
in December 2010. She intended to make a January payment after her hearing. She did 
not provide documented proof.15  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management investigator on 
December 18, 2009. In her interview she acknowledged some of her delinquent debts. 
She also stated she believed certain debts had been paid, and she disputed other 
debts. The debts she acknowledged owing she stated she did not have the money to 
pay them. On May 26, 2010, she affirmed the information disclosed in her interview was 
10 AE D, G. 
 
11 Tr. 90-92. 
 
12 Tr. 92-95. 
 
13 Tr. 95-97. 
 
14 Tr. 97-98. 
 
15 Tr. 98-101. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
accurate. In answers to interrogatories, she stated she would satisfy the debts she 
owed from money she anticipated receiving from an income tax refund.16 
 
 Applicant has approximately $48,000 in student loans that are in forbearance. 
She stated that she last made a payment in approximately 2007. The forbearance will 
expire in October 2011, at which time she will be required to pay $600 a month. She is 
hoping to negotiate a reduced payment. Applicant has no money in her savings 
account, a nominal amount in her checking account, and no retirement accounts, or 
other investments. She is hoping to increase her salary to help her pay her delinquent 
debts. She is hoping that when her older son begins high school he will be able to 
babysit the younger son so she can save money on childcare. Applicant has not 
received any financial counseling. She stated she has a budget and keeps track of her 
expenses. She stated she is current on the payment of her other bills.17  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of an award that she received as “staff member of the 
quarter from July 2010 to September 2010.” She received the award for her exceptional 
professional leadership and outstanding work ethic.18 
 
 Applicant provided character letters that describe her as an energetic mother, 
who volunteers her time to the school. She is active in the community and an 
inspiration. She gives of her time and talents. She is considered an outstanding 
individual.19 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor provided a character letter on her behalf. He 
describes Applicant as responsible, reliable, and loyal to the mission. She has a great 
attendance record which is crucial in her job because many clients are in different time 
zones. She is a considered a major team player. She was recognized for her 
commitment to the mission.20 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
16 GE 5. 
 
17 Tr. 111-126. 
 
18 AE A. 
 
19 AE B. 
 
20 Id. 
 
6 
 
 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are unpaid or unresolved. The 
delinquencies began in 2005, after her husband left. She has been unable or unwilling 
to satisfy the debts. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Most of Applicant’s delinquent debts are unpaid and unresolved. I find they are 
numerous and ongoing. Applicant failed to provide a credible plan for resolving the 
debts. I find her debts are not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problem to her husband abandoning the family 
in 2004, and taking all of their joint assets. This condition was beyond her control. 
However, for AG ¶ 20(b) to be completely applicable, Applicant must provide evidence 
that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. It has now been more than six 
years since her husband left. She stated she was evicted from their townhouse in March 
2005 because she did not know he sold it while she was still living there. It is 
unreasonable to believe that after her husband left in 2004, and her eviction in March 
2005, that she remained unaware that her savings had been depleted until she 
purchased a new car in August or September 2005. Many of Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are for small amounts that she has made no attempt to resolve. Although 
Applicant’s financial problems began six years ago, she has not provided sufficient 
evidence to show she has acted responsibly in addressing her delinquent debts since 
then. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant provided proof she paid one delinquent debt. She has made a couple 
of small payments during the past six months on two other debts, but has been 
inconsistent in paying as promised. She has not addressed other debts and as to those 
she disputes, she did not provide documentation to support the basis of the dispute or 
to show it is resolved. She does not have a formulated plan to resolve her debts, other 
than she hopes to save on daycare costs when her oldest son goes to high school. 
There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, has initiated a good-
faith effort to resolve her remaining delinquent debts, or disputed the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 
20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
husband abandoned her and their children in 2004. He sold the townhouse where they 
were living and did not tell Applicant. He took all of their savings. He has not provided 
child support. Applicant has been steadily employed and, during the last two years she 
was with her husband, she has been the sole provider for the family. Although her 
husband’s actions had a financial effect on her, it has now been more than six years 
since he left. She has one large debt and many small debts. She paid one debt and has 
made sporadic small payments on two others. She was made aware during her 
background interview in December 2009, that her delinquent debts were a concern. She 
does not have a reasonable payment plan to address and resolve her delinquent debts. 
She stated she disputed certain debts, but failed to provide any evidence of her actions. 
She has made minimal efforts to resolve even her small delinquent debts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.h    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i    None Alleged 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
