 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03703 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 14, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories. He responded to 
the interrogatories on April 9, 2010.2 On August 17, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated September14, 2009.  
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 9, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 20, 2010. In a written 
statement, notarized on May 14, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on October 14, 2010, and the case was assigned 
to me on November 9, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on January 4, 2011, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on January 26, 2011. 
 
 During the hearing, four Government exhibits (GE 1-4) and four Applicant 
exhibits (AE A-D) were admitted into evidence, without objection. Applicant testified. 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on February 14, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.t.) of the SOR. Those 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the remaining factual 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. through 2.c.). 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor, serving as an 
information assurance specialist, and he is seeking to retain a security clearance.3 A 
May 1990 high school graduate, he initially attended college for about one year, but left 
in April 1991 due to poor grades.4 He worked in a variety of full-time and part-time, as 
well as seasonal, positions over the years,5 before returning to college where he 
received a bachelor of science degree in management information systems in August 
2004.6 He has no military service.7 Applicant was unemployed on two occasions. He 
was initially laid off due to a downturn in business from July 2007 until April 2008.8 He 
obtained new employment in April 2008, and remained there until June 2009, when he 
3 At the time of the hearing, Applicant held an interim Secret clearance. Tr. at 6. 
 
4 Id. at 50. 
 
5 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 14-19; Id. at 50, 52-54. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, at 12. 
 
7 Id. at 20. 
 
8 Personal Subject Interview, dated November 6, 2009, at 1, attached to Government Exhibit 2, supra note 
2. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
declined to relocate at the company’s behest.9 He remained unemployed until 
September 2009, when he accepted his current position.10 During his periods of 
unemployment, Applicant received unemployment compensation.11  
 
Applicant was married in May 2004, and he and his wife have one daughter, born 
in January 2011.12 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant contends that there was nothing unusual about his finances until 
November 2007, several months after he had been initially laid off.13 His wife had also 
been laid off in July 2007, but she was able to obtain another position in October 2007, 
at a reduced salary.14 She was again laid off in April 2009, but was able to find 
temporary work from June to August 2009, when she transitioned into a permanent 
position.15 In September 2007, during one of his periods of unemployment, Applicant 
had shoulder surgery, followed by physical therapy until November 2007.16 During one 
of her periods of unemployment, his wife also underwent wrist surgery, adding to their 
bills.17 Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to the reduction in family income, 
related to unemployment and reduced salaries, as well as the “unexpected” medical 
expenses of their respective surgeries.18 As a result, he fell behind in his monthly 
payments, and several accounts were placed for collection or charged off.19  
 
When he completed his SF 86 in September 2009, Applicant self-reported three 
delinquent accounts.20 For one account, with his dentist, Applicant indicated he was 
making regular monthly payments since he did not have dental insurance.21 For another 
account, pertaining to his physical therapy, he stated there had been unresolved 
9 Id. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Id.  
 
12 Tr. at 55. 
 
13 Id. 57, 61. 
 
14 Applicant’s adjustments to his Personal Subject Interview, undated, attached to Government Exhibit 2, 
supra note 2. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id.; Tr. at 59-60. 
 
17 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 8, at 2.  
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Government Exhibit 3 (Combined Experian, Trans Union, and Equifax Credit Report, dated October 6, 
2009) (2009 credit report); Government Exhibit 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated May 19, 2010) (2010 credit report). 
 
20 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 39-41. 
 
21 Id. at 39. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
insurance issues, as well as his unemployment, but that a payment schedule had been 
set up.22 As to the third account, with his wife’s surgeon, Applicant was making regular 
monthly payments.23  
 
During his November 2009 interview with an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant admitted he had ignored certain creditors for 
either unspecified reasons or because the accounts were “not a priority.”24 He planned 
to contact his remaining creditors to negotiate payment plans.25 There is no 
documentary evidence to indicate that he made any contacts with his creditors, either in 
2009 or in 2010. 
 
Applicant received one hour of unspecified “financial counseling” in 2006 in 
conjunction with an application for a Federal Housing Administration (FHA) home 
loan.26 He acknowledged he had received no other financial counseling,27 and there is 
no evidence of any counseling for budgeting, debt management, debt consolidation, or 
debt repayment plans.  
 
Applicant discussed the details of his monthly budget, and estimated that his 
monthly net income was $3,200, and his wife’s monthly net income was $2,000, for a 
total of $5,200.28 His annual salary is $52,500, and his wife’s annual salary is $30,000, 
but she is currently on 8-12 weeks maternity leave without pay.29 After paying the 
normal household expenses, including mortgage, utilities, food, transportation, 
insurance, etc., he estimated his monthly remainder of $400-$500 is available for 
discretionary spending.30 
 
The SOR identified 20 continuing delinquencies as reflected by the credit reports 
from 2009 and 2010, totaling approximately $40,999. Some accounts listed in the credit 
reports have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection 
agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in these credit reports, in many 
instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the same creditor name or 
under a different creditor name. Some accounts are identified by complete account 
numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in some instances 
22 Id. at 40. 
 
23 Id. at 41. 
 
24 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
25 Id. at 2-3. 
 
26 Tr. at 65. 
 
27 Id.  
 
28 Id. at 26-27. 
 
29 Id. at 25. 
 
30 Id. at 27-28. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits. Some accounts 
reflect no account number.  
 
The delinquent accounts include two student loans totaling $36,096 (SOR ¶¶ 1.s. 
and 1.t.); 17 medical accounts totaling $971 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.q.); and a credit 
card with an unpaid balance of $3,932 (SOR ¶ 1.r.). Applicant contends that 16 of the 
medical accounts totaling $540 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.p.) are the same account,31 but 
he offered no documentary evidence to support his contention. Each of the 16 accounts 
has a separate account number listed in the 2010 credit report.32 Applicant has not paid 
anything on the account(s) and claims that, for two months, he has been “in 
negotiations” over a repayment plan.33 As for the remaining medical account (SOR ¶ 
1.q.), he claims he cannot find out who the creditor is, so he has been unable to resolve 
the account.34 The 2009 credit report identifies the collection agency as well as the 
account number.35 He contends he is in negotiations over a $147 monthly repayment 
plan with the collection agency regarding the delinquent credit card account (SOR ¶ 
1.r.), but will have no documents to support his contention until final payment 
arrangements are made.36 Applicant’s student loans previously had been in deferment, 
but are now in collection, and he claims one collection agency required 15 per cent of 
his income to commence repayment, but Applicant is seeking alternative payment 
arrangements (SOR ¶ 1.s.).37 He claims he is not able to contact the other collection 
agency (SOR ¶ 1.t.).38  
 
Despite an estimated monthly remainder of $400-$500 available for discretionary 
spending, as well as promises by Applicant to contact his creditors, establish payment 
plans, and pay off the delinquent accounts, to date, he has offered no evidence that he 
has made any payments to the creditors. As to the accounts listed in the SOR, based 
on the evidence before me, I conclude that no payments have been made to any of the 
delinquent accounts. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
On September 14, 2009, when Applicant completed and submitted his e-QIP, he 
responded to several questions set forth in the e-QIP. The SOR alleges Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose complete information in response to § 26m: Financial 
31 Id. at 21. 
 
32 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 19, at 1-2. 
 
33 Tr. at 21. 
 
34 Id. at 22. 
 
35 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 19, at 8. 
 
36 Tr. at 23. 
 
37 Id. at 24. 
 
38 Id. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
Record – (Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?), to which he 
answered “yes,” and listed a medical debt in the amount of $271.64.39 He did not list his 
two delinquent student loans. Applicant claims he thought the student loans were in a 
deferment status, and did not think they were delinquent. He denied the omission was 
deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts.40 
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information in response to § 26n: Financial Record – (Are you currently over 90 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?), to which he answered “yes,” and listed a dental debt in the 
amount of $364.81. Once again, he did not list his two delinquent student loans for the 
same reason as set forth above. He denied the omission was deliberate or an attempt 
to falsify the material facts.41 
 
The SOR also alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose complete 
information in response to § 26p: Financial Record – (Are you currently delinquent on 
any Federal debt?), to which he answered “no.” Once again, he did not list his two 
delinquent student loans for the same reason as set forth above. He denied the 
omission was deliberate or an attempt to falsify the material facts.42 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 Several of Applicant’s coworkers, as well as his team lead and the individual who 
led the panel that interviewed the candidates when Applicant was hired, are familiar with 
him and characterize him in favorable terms. Applicant demonstrates integrity, 
motivation, patriotism, strong family dedication, honesty, knowledge, intelligence, 
capability, thoughtfulness, and maturity. He is a hardworking person who is well 
respected.43  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”44 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
 
39 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
40 Tr. at 40-41, 70. 
 
41 Id.  
 
42 Id.  
 
43 Applicant Exhibit A (Character Reference, dated January 25, 2011; Applicant Exhibit B (Character 
Reference, undated; Applicant Exhibit C (Character Reference, undated); Applicant Exhibit D (Character Reference, 
dated January 25, 2011). 
 
44 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”45   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”46 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.47  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, 
“security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”48 
45 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
46 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
47 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
48 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”49 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, Applicant contends that there was nothing unusual 
about his finances until November 2007, several months after he had been laid off. Both 
Applicant and his wife went through varying periods of unemployment from July 2007 
until September 2009. Both Applicant and his wife underwent surgery during one of their 
periods of unemployment. Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to the reduction in 
family income, related to unemployment and reduced salaries, as well as the 
“unexpected” medical expenses of their respective surgeries. As a result, he fell behind 
in his monthly payments, and several accounts were placed for collection or charged 
off. They have remained in a delinquent status ever since because Applicant ignored 
certain creditors for unspecified reasons or because the accounts were not a priority. 
There is little evidence to indicate any of the SOR-accounts have been resolved. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 
 
49 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@50 Also, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced in November 2007, and have 
continued to the present day, although his wife joined her current employer in June 
2009, and he joined his current employer in September 2009. Applicant has 
acknowledged limited effective efforts or resolution of his delinquent accounts. His 
failure to timely handle his bills has exacerbated his financial meltdown. Because he 
has multiple delinquent debts and his financial problems are continuing in nature, he 
receives minimal application of AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling of his finances, under 
the circumstances, casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  
 
Likewise, he receives partial application of AG ¶ 20(b), for he and his wife were 
unemployed for varying periods, and they both had surgery while they were 
unemployed. Yet, there is little evidence that Applicant was substantially affected by 
circumstances beyond his control. He received unemployment compensation while 
unemployed. Applicant’s wife has been employed since June 2009, and he has been 
employed since September 2009. Given sufficient opportunity to address their financial 
delinquencies, Applicant failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. He 
failed to resolve his debts and failed to reduce his delinquencies.51  
50 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
51 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
AG & 20(c) applies only minimally because, other than unspecified “financial 
counseling” received in conjunction with an FHA home loan in 2006, Applicant has 
acknowledged never having received financial counseling or debt consolidation 
guidance from a credit counselor. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because, to date, Applicant has made no proven effort 
to address his delinquent accounts. There is no documentary evidence to support 
Applicant’s contentions that he contacted any of his creditors to try to make repayment 
arrangements. Instead, he talked about doing so, and promised to do so, but there is no 
documentary evidence that any creditors had agreed with his proposed plan or that any 
payments had, in fact, been made. Over the years, Applicant did not act aggressively, 
timely, or responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not provided documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of any disputed account. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying.  
 
Applicant’s omissions in his responses to inquiries in the e-QIP of critical 
information pertaining to financial delinquencies, provide sufficient evidence to examine 
if his submissions were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or were the 
result of simple oversight or negligence on his part, as he contends. As to the questions 
pertaining to 90 day or 180 day delinquencies, Applicant answered “yes” to both, and 
identified two accounts. As to the question pertaining of Federal debt delinquencies, he 
answered “no.” In all three cases, the omitted accounts were Applicant’s student loans 
 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
which he contended were in deferment status, not in a delinquency status. I had ample 
opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his manner and deportment, 
appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess his candor or 
evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony. It is my impression that 
his confusion regarding his perceived status of the student loans was real and his 
explanations are consistent. Considering the quality of the other evidence before me, 
they have the solid resonance of truth. I find Applicant’s explanations are credible in his 
denial of deliberate falsification.52 AG ¶¶ 16(a) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He and his wife 
went through several periods of unemployment and both underwent surgery. After a 
lengthy period of inaction during which he did not address his creditors, according to 
Applicant, he initiated some efforts to address his accounts.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
While the periods of unemployment and reduced earnings, as well as the surgeries, 
were circumstances beyond his control, Applicant either had no ability or no intention to 
pay his delinquent accounts. Instead, as he has acknowledged, he ignored certain 
52 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the 
burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not 
establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission 
occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], 
it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion 
had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
creditors for either unspecified reasons or because the accounts were “not a priority.” 
He did not make any payments to his SOR creditors, and if he did, he has offered no 
evidence to support any such actions. Despite the passage of time, there is no 
documentation to support his contentions that he had contacted his creditors. His long-
standing failure to repay creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange 
payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance.  
 
I am mindful that any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
credit history in a sympathetic light. I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.53 His insufficient good-faith efforts or documentary evidence to reflect actual 
payments to his SOR creditors are sufficient to raise continuing security concerns. See 
AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:54 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Although there are some positive signs, such as Applicant’s descriptions of 
proposed efforts to take corrective actions, and maintenance of accounts on his current 
daily living expenses, these steps are simply insufficient to show he can live within his 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
53 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
54 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
13 
                                      
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
     
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
     
 
14 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
