                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00472 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 25, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 7, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 9, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on January 19, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into 
evidence. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and one witness 
testified on his behalf. He offered Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objections. 
The record was held open until January 21, 2011, to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents. Applicant submitted an additional document with multiple pages which was 
marked as AE B, and admitted without objection, and the record closed. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o. The request was 
granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He married in 1999. He has three children, ages 11, 10 
and 5. He is a high school graduate and is presently attending college online to obtain 
his bachelor’s degree. He needs 25 more credits to complete it. Applicant’s wife has a 
medical problem. For a period of time she was a homemaker because the cost of 
daycare was greater than her earnings. She resumed working in May 2009, and was 
laid off in June 2010. She received approximately $140 a week from unemployment 
insurance, but that has expired. She is actively pursuing any type of employment.1  
 
 In 2002, Applicant was a car salesman. He worked solely on commission. He 
estimated he was earning about $100,000 annually. He was able to pay his mortgage 
and other monthly expenses. In 2004, the car business began to decline and it 
continued to decline significantly through 2008. Applicant’s income was reduced to 
about $36,000 in 2008. He looked for other employment opportunities in the area, but 
did not find any. He could no longer afford his house payments. His father advised him 
to move to the state where he was residing because the job market was better. In 
December 2008, Applicant moved his family across the country and lived with his 
parents until April 2010, when they moved to a rental unit. Applicant believed he would 
be able to find a job quickly when he moved to the new state. That was not the case. He 
was unemployed for six months. He worked at a car dealership for a period of time and 
his monthly earnings were about $2,100.2  
 
 In September 2009, Applicant began work with a county sheriff’s department as a 
deputy sheriff. He made the sheriff’s department aware of his financial problems and 
advised them he had delinquent debts. He passed their background investigation. Since 
then he has completed several law enforcement schools that will allow him to work in 
1 Tr. 25, 27-30, 37, 54-56. 
 
2 Tr. 18-22, 30. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
different areas. He received his law enforcement certification, which gives him arrest 
authority and authorizes him to work for any law enforcement agency in the state. His 
salary is $33,000. His youngest child’s preschool costs are paid under a state grant 
program. He has applied for food stamps, but was denied because his income level is 
just over the threshold requirement.3  
 
 Applicant has applied for another job so he can subsidize his current income. 
The new job will require a security clearance. He decided that the only way to resolve 
his delinquent debts is to file bankruptcy. He met with an attorney, who provided a letter 
verifying that he will file Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant has delayed filing because he 
must save enough money to pay the attorney before he proceeds. He stated the reason 
he decided to file for bankruptcy was because he wanted to show he was taking 
affirmative steps to resolve his delinquent debts.4  
 
 Four of Applicant’s debts are for medical services that were not covered by 
insurance. SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l are likely duplicates. All of the others, except SOR ¶ 1.m 
are credit card debts that were used for living expenses. SOR ¶ 1.m is a foreclosure on 
the house Applicant owned. It was purchased by the bank. He has not been contacted 
about whether there is a deficiency. He last made a payment in October 2008. The 
creditor has Applicant’s new address. There was no second mortgage on the house.5  
 
 In 2009, Applicant earned $21,000. He was unemployed for six months of the 
year. He has no other delinquent debts except those that are listed on the SOR. The 
approximate amount of delinquent debts Applicant owes is $13,000.6  
 
 Applicant’s father testified on his behalf. He verified he advised Applicant to 
move because the job prospects were better. He raised his son to be honest and have 
integrity. He believes his son has maintained that standard.7  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. He is described as fair, thoughtful, and 
intelligent. He thinks first and acts second. He holds himself to a very high set of morals 
and standards. He is reliable and has integrity. He is considered a great father, 
husband, and citizen. He displays a selfless attitude toward his family and country. A 
former employer and supervisor described him as extremely responsible with excellent 
work habits and an asset to the company.8 
 
3 Tr. 22-26, 31, 45-53. 
 
4 Tr. 33-34- 38, 55; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 38-45. 
 
6 Tr. 45-51. 
 
7 Tr. 57-63. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. He 
began accumulating the debt in 2007 and 2008. I find there is sufficient evidence to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. He 
was earning a substantial income, when the industry he worked in experienced an 
economic downturn. He took action to increase his job opportunities by moving to a 
state where the job prospects were better. Unfortunately, it took him six months to get a 
job, and the salary was meager for a family of four to live on. His wife had medical 
issues, but she eventually found work. She was laid off and is now looking for a new 
job. He used credit cards to provide for his family while unemployed. Applicant attended 
school to make him more marketable. He earned his law enforcement certificate. He is 
attempting to subsidize his meager deputy sheriff’s salary, so he can better support his 
family. He was declined food stamps, but received a state grant for his child’s 
preschool. Applicant decided to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy to show that he is not ignoring 
his debts. I find the conditions that resulted in Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely 
to recur and do not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 The conditions that caused Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his 
control. He worked in an industry that is steered by consumer spending. He saw his 
salary take a plunge, so he took action to find a way to support his family. He moved to 
a new state, lived with his parents, went to school, and after being unemployed for six 
months, finally obtained a job. His wife worked, but was laid off and is looking for a new 
job. He is attempting to work a second job. I find that Applicant acted responsibly when 
he encountered financial problems and conclude AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant is working with an attorney to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which will 
resolve his debts. He is realistic about his ability to repay his delinquent debts, 
especially based on his current salary. He determined that, under the circumstances, 
the best way to resolve them is with a fresh start through bankruptcy. I find there are 
clear indications the problem is being resolved through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant has not paid his delinquent debts, but he is 
resolving them through bankruptcy, so AG ¶ 20(d) also applies. Applicant does not 
dispute the debts, so AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant was 
earning a substantial salary when he was confronted with an economic downturn. He 
took his father’s advice and moved to a state where the job prospects appeared better. 
He was unemployed for six months, he and his family lived with his parents, and he 
attended school so he could change careers. He is now in law enforcement, but he 
could not recover from the economic devastation. He has approximately $13,000 in 
delinquent debts. He made a realistic decision that the only way to resolve his 
delinquent debts was through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He has begun that process. 
Applicant is trying to get another job so he can increase his income and support his 
family. His wife worked until she was laid off and is now searching for a job. Applicant’s 
character references describe him as a well respected man of integrity. I find that the 
financial considerations that were raised are not a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
