 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 (Redacted) )  ISCR Case No. 10-01840 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on September 28, 2009. On 
September 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines C and B. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 28, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on September 30, 2010. 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 31, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on November 3, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
12, 2010, scheduling it for December 10, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through S, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 20, 2010. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Greece. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. I took administrative notice as requested by Department 
Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Correction of Transcript 
 
 Applicant submitted three pages of proposed corrections to the transcript, which 
are attached to the record as HX II. Without objection by Department Counsel, I have 
incorporated his proposed changes. Department Counsel’s comments regarding the 
proposed corrections are attached to the record as HX III. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b 
and 2.a-2.d, but he denied that the facts alleged showed foreign preference or 
constituted a security concern. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old native of Greece. His father was a citizen of Greece 
and his mother was a citizen of the United States. (Tr. 33-34.) When Applicant was 
three years old, his father was killed in a shipping accident. In 1955, his mother decided 
that she, Applicant’s sister, and Applicant should return to the United States, and they 
have all lived in the United States since then. (Tr. 34.) All living members of his 
immediate family live in the United States. (Tr. 70.)  
 
Applicant’s security clearance application indicated that he became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in April 1962. The naturalization certificate is not included in the record. 
Because his mother is a native-born U.S. citizen, it is likely that he received a certificate 
of citizenship rather than a naturalization certificate. In any event, it is clear that he is a 
dual citizen of the United States and Greece. He was born in 1944, when Greece was 
occupied by Germany and there was no U.S. embassy with which to register his birth. 
(Tr. 57.) He completed grade school, high school, and college in the United States. He 
graduated from a law school in the United States in June 1969 and was admitted to 
practice as a lawyer in the same year. (Tr. 34-35; AX A.) He is unmarried and has no 
children. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant inherited some agricultural land in Greece from his father in 1947, 
which he owns jointly with his mother and his sister. The estimated value of this 
property is about $100,000. He also inherited a house in Greece from his grandmother 
in 1964, which he owns jointly with his sister. The house is worth about $50,000.  
 
Applicant was commissioned as an officer in the United States Coast Guard 
Reserve in October 1968, and he served on active duty in the Coast Guard from April 
1970 to October 1973. He stayed in the Coast Guard Reserve after being released from 
active duty and attained the rank of lieutenant commander. He was discharged from the 
Coast Guard Reserve with an honorable discharge. (Tr. 36; GX 1 at 16; AX B.)  
 
After his active duty military service, Applicant returned to the practice of law, 
specializing in maritime law, admiralty proceedings, and international commercial law. 
He eventually became the general counsel for a group of shipping companies.  
 
Applicant retired from practicing law after 20 years. In 1992, he organized a 
company that provides freight forwarding, ship chartering, and steam ship line agency 
services. He and his partner are the sole and equal owners of the company. His partner 
became the president of the company, and Applicant became the vice-president and the 
facility security officer. (Tr. 37.) This company earns about 15% of its total revenue from 
its freight forwarding of U.S. military materials to Greece, and the remainder of its 
revenue from commercial non-military, non-governmental contracts. It does not act as a 
freight forwarder for any foreign country other than Greece. The company’s annual 
revenue is about $1 million, of which about $150,000 is from freight forwarding contracts 
with Greece. (Tr. 79-80.) 
 
Applicant and his partner also organized a similar freight forwarding company 
based in Greece. Originally, he and his partner each had a one-third interest in the 
Greek company, and the remaining one-third was held by Greek partners, who manage 
the company. Applicant and his partner sit on the board of directors of the Greek 
company. They now each own a one-sixth interest in the Greek company and the 
remaining two-thirds is held by the Greek partners. (Tr. 38, 73.) Applicant attends the 
annual and special meetings of the board of directors, which are held in Greece. The 
shipping company transports military equipment from the United States to Greece under 
the Foreign Military Sales program.  
 
Applicant has occasional meetings with the military attaché at the Greek 
Embassy in Washington, D.C. to coordinate the shipment of military equipment from the 
United States to Greece. All of his contacts with the Greek embassy in the United 
States have been related to his freight forwarding contracts with the Greek government. 
He has no social contact outside of business meetings. He has never attended 
embassy functions or receptions. (Tr. 94-95.) 
 
The Greek company derives about 50% of its revenue from contracts with the 
Greek government. Its contract with the Greek government covers all transfers of 
military materials and dual-use materials from the United States to Greece. It does not 
 
4 
 
 
act as the freight forwarder for any other country, but it does have other private 
commercial contracts. (Tr. 74-78.) Applicant testified that he did not know the annual 
gross revenue for the Greek-based company. (Tr. 80.) This company does not have 
U.S. security clearance, but was required to obtain a clearance from the Greek 
government and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) clearance. (Tr. 86.) 
 
Applicant owns a 25% interest in a U.S.-flagged ocean going ship. (Applicant’s 
Memorandum in Support of His Answer to SOR at 3.) He also sits on the board of 
directors of a Liberian shipping company based in Greece. He helped organize the 
Liberian company, but he does not have an ownership interest in it. It is wholly owned 
by Greek investors. This company ships cargo that cannot be put in containers, either 
because it is too large or it is dry cargo. Applicant’s U.S.-based freight forwarding 
company is the shipping company’s agent in the United States. (Tr. 83-84.) Applicant 
has received compensation for being a director of the shipping company. He did not 
receive anything in 2009, but he believes he may have received about $50,000 in the 
past. (Tr. 85.) 
 
In 1994, Applicant’s U.S.-based company successfully bid on a contract from the 
Greek Ministry of Justice to provide ocean transportation to Greece for all arms, 
munitions, and military supplies acquired by Greece in the United States, and to provide 
return transportation when items must be returned to the United States for repairs or 
other reasons. (Tr. 38-39.) Except for a period between 1998 and 2000, Applicant’s 
company has continually held this contract from 1994 to the present. (Tr. 39.) 
 
In July 1994, the Greek embassy informed the U.S. Defense Logistics Agency 
(DLA) that the Hellenic Ministry of Defense and Applicant’s freight forwarding company 
had signed a transportation contract and requested that the freight forwarding company 
be granted a security clearance. (AX C.) In August 1994, DLA forwarded the request for 
facility clearance to the Defense Investigative Service (DIS), citing the directives 
pertaining to the U.S. Military Assistance Program, and requesting that DIS respond 
directly to the Greek embassy. (AX D.) DIS in turn forwarded the request to the Defense 
Industrial Security Clearance Office (DISCO) and notified Applicant’s company of the 
need for designated employees of the facility to obtain security clearances. (AX E; AX 
F.)  
 
In September 1994, the president of Applicant’s company executed a “Certificate 
Pertaining to Foreign Interests,” in which he disclosed that he and Applicant owned the 
freight forwarding company in equal shares, that they each owned a one-third interest in 
the Greek shipping company, and that the freight forwarding company acts as agent for 
the shipping company with respect to all military cargo being shipped from the United 
States for the Greek Armed Forces. (AX I.) In October 1994, Applicant’s company was 
notified that they had received a favorable adjudication of their involvement in foreign 
interests. (AX J.)  
 
In December 1994, Applicant received a security clearance and his company 
was granted a facility clearance. (AX G; AX H.) In January 1995 and November 1995, 
 
5 
 
 
however, Applicant was advised that his facility would not be cleared for storage of 
classified materials until an additional employee was cleared and the company’s 
transportation plan was approved. (AX K; AX L.) In July 1996, Applicant was advised 
that a transportation plan must be included in each contract that involved the 
international transfer of classified material. (AX N.) In December 1996, Applicant was 
advised that his transportation plan was approved. His company was commended for 
maintaining “a highly satisfactory security posture” and for an employee’s high-quality 
record keeping and overall knowledge of the National Industrial Security Program. (AX 
M.) Applicant’s facility was inspected and received satisfactory ratings in September 
1997, February 2005, and August 2006. (AX O, P, and Q.) Inspections in October 2009 
and August 2010 revealed minor administrative deficiencies. (AX R and S.) 
 
The terms of sale of the military materials sold to Greece by the United States 
provide that the passing of title takes place at a U.S. military depot where the materials 
are stored or at the Greek freight forwarder’s warehouse in the United States. 
Therefore, there must be a Greek agent in the United States to take delivery. 
Applicant’s Greek freight forwarding company does not have an office in the United 
States, and so they assign the freight forwarding function to Applicant’s U.S.-based 
company and inform the Greek Ministry of Defense of the assignment. The Greek 
Ministry of Defense in turn notifies the military attaché in the Greek embassy in the 
United States, who is responsible for administering the contracts for purchase and 
transportation of military materials. The Greek military attaché then informs the United 
States government agencies that Applicant’s company is the freight forwarder for 
Greece, and the United States government gives clearance to transport the materials. 
The information is entered in the Military Assistance Program Address Directory, so that 
everyone involved in the transaction, especially the depots, know whom they should 
contact and where they should send the materials. (Tr. 40-43.) 
 
Applicant held a Greek passport from childhood until he learned that it raised 
security issues. He used his Greek passport to enter Greece and his U.S. passport to 
reenter the United States. (Tr. 65.) He used the Greek passport because the lines were 
shorter and he was not limited to a 60-day stay. (Tr. 65-66.) He also used his Greek 
passport number as identification for his Greek bank accounts, his utility accounts, and 
the titles of the property he had inherited from his family. Based on his experience 
before he obtained a Greek passport in the 1980s, he does not believe that using a 
Greek passport resulted in more favorable treatment than using a U.S. passport. (Tr. 
67.) However, he testified that he prefers to retain his dual citizenship because it is 
useful for his business. He would consider renouncing his Greek citizenship if he were 
told that it was inconsistent with his obligations to the United States. (Tr. 58.) 
 
Applicant owns an automobile in Greece, but he does not have a Greek driver’s 
license. He uses an international driver’s license that he obtained in the United States. 
(Tr. 70.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s travel to Greece is mostly business-related, although he does take 
vacation time and visits his extended family and friends while in Greece. He spent about 
120 days in Greece during 2009. (Tr. 71.) 
 
In January 2010, he notified the DISCO of his intention to obtain a Greek 
identification card as a form of local identification in place of his Greek passport. (GX 5.) 
There is no indication that the DISCO had concerns about him obtaining a Greek 
identification card. He surrendered his passport to Greek authorities in April 2010. He 
obtained a Greek identity card from the local police headquarters, and now uses the 
number of his Greek identity card on these accounts and documents. (Tr. 54; GX 3 at 3; 
GX 4 at 4-5.) He uses his U.S. passport for travel to Greece and other countries. He 
testified that it is necessary to be a Greek citizen to obtain a Greek identity card. He 
surmised that the only advantage of carrying a Greek identity card was that he might be 
able to avoid severe penalties for overstaying his 60-day visit by doing “a little bit of 
talking” with officials at the airport, but he has never tried it. (Tr. 90-91.) 
 
Applicant maintains a personal bank account in Greece, with an average balance 
of about $11,000, that he uses to pay bills incurred in Greece. He testified that it is “very 
troublesome” to make transfers from a U.S. Bank to pay telephone bills, utility bills, and 
the like. Greek citizenship is not required to open a bank account, but some form of 
identification is required. A U.S. passport is acceptable identification. (Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Applicant occasionally stays in the house he inherited from his grandmother, but 
when he is working he stays in an apartment in Athens that he has rented for about ten 
years. (Tr. 61-62.) The land that he inherited from his father is occupied by a caretaker, 
and the minimal income derived from the land goes to the caretaker. (Tr.63.) 
 
Greece is a developed and stable democracy with a modern economy. It is a 
constitutional republic and a multiparty parliamentary democracy, with an estimated 
population of 11 million. It has been a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) since 1952 and it is an important ally of the United States. The two countries 
maintain a mutual defense cooperation agreement. Greece provided peacekeeping and 
training contingents for Bosnia, Kosovo, and Afghanistan. 
 
The Greek economy is a predominately service economy, which includes tourism 
and accounts for over 73% of the gross domestic product. Almost 9% of the world’s 
merchant fleet is Greek-owned, making the Greek fleet the largest in the world. Greek 
authorities have participated in the container security initiative and cooperated with the 
United States on information sharing as well and the training of Greek security and 
customs officials and judicial personnel. 
 
In 2008, U.S. exports to Greece were $2.4 million, accounting for 2.7% of 
Greece’s total imports for the year. The top U.S. exports are defense-related materials.  
 
Domestic terrorism increased in 2009, with more than 430 security incidents, 
more than have been recorded in the previous 20 years. The high level of terrorism 
 
7 
 
 
continued into 2010. Targets have included the Greek government, security forces, and 
law enforcement personnel; U.S.-affiliated businesses, U.S.-affiliated banks, the Athens 
Stock Exchange, and U.S. and other foreign embassies. Greece has become an entry 
point for illegal immigrants from the Middle East and South Asia, and is a likely transit 
route for terrorists traveling to Europe and the United States. The Greek government 
generally respected the rights of its citizens, and there is an independent and impartial 
judiciary that allows citizens to seek compensation for violations of individual rights. 
Civilian authorities have generally maintained effective control of the security forces, 
although some abuse by security forces was reported during the increased level of 
terrorism in 2009.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
8 
 
 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant obtained and maintains a Greek Identity Card, for 
use in lieu of a Greek passport, as a form of identification in order to do business in 
Greece and access his bank account, utility accounts and tax accounts in Greece (¶ 
1.a). It also alleges he maintains his Greek citizenship to protect his assets in Greece (¶ 
1.b). 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline C is set out in AG ¶ 9: “When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” A disqualifying condition may 
arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited to “possession of a current foreign 
passport” and “using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country.” AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and (5). 
 
 Dual citizenship standing alone is not sufficient to warrant an adverse security 
clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 
2000). Under Guideline C, “the issue is not whether an applicant is a dual national, but 
rather whether an applicant shows a preference for a foreign country through actions.”  
ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15, 1999). 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile to the 
U.S. “Under the facts of a given case, an applicant’s preference, explicit or implied, 
even for a nation with which the U.S. has enjoyed long and peaceful relations, might 
pose a challenge to U.S. interests.” ADP Case No. 07-14939 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 
2009). 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant surrendered his Greek passport when he learned that it raised security 
concerns. He obtained a Greek identity card, which is available only to Greek citizens, 
but it confers no privileges other than to identify the holder as a Greek citizen.  
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 10(a)(1) is not raised because Applicant surrendered his 
Greek passport when he learned that it raised security issues. AG ¶ 10(a)(5) also is not 
raised, because there is no evidence that Applicant used his Greek citizenship to 
protect his financial or business interests. Applicant testified that Greek citizenship was 
not a requirement for owning property or maintaining a Greek bank account, and there 
is no evidence in the record to the contrary. See ISCR Case No. 03-23806 at 4, 2005 
WL 3134149 (App. Bd. Apr. 28, 2005) (holding that there was no basis in the record for 
concluding that an applicant used his Greek citizenship to protect or maintain his 
property in Greece). 
 
However, Applicant’s possession and use of a Greek identity card is an exercise 
of foreign citizenship sufficient to raise AG ¶ 10(a), even though it does not fit under any 
of the enumerated examples and the benefits are nominal. Thus, the burden falls on 
Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 
The relevant mitigating conditions under this guideline are: 
 
AG ¶ 11(a): Dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth 
in a foreign country.  
 
AG ¶ 11(b): The individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship. 
 
AG ¶ 11(c): Exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when 
the individual was a minor.  
 
AG ¶ 11(e): The passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
 I conclude that AG ¶ 11(a) is partly established. Applicant was born in Greece 
and his father was Greek. However, he has exercised his Greek citizenship using a 
Greek passport and by obtaining a Greek identity card, precluding full application of this 
mitigating condition. 
 
 Applicant receives some credit under AG ¶ 11(b) because he has expressed 
willingness to surrender his Greek citizenship if he is told that it is inconsistent with his 
obligations to the United States. However, the contingent nature of his willingness 
precludes full application of this mitigating condition. 
 
 Applicant receives no credit under AG ¶ 11(c). He obtained and used a Greek 
passport in the 1980s, after he was a U.S. citizen and a mature adult. 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 11(d) for surrendering his Greek passport. 
However, his credit is diminished by his exercise of Greek citizenship to obtain a Greek 
identity card, even though the identity card does not confer the privileges of a passport. 
 
 Notwithstanding the limited application of the enumerated mitigating conditions 
under this guideline, I conclude that the totality of the evidence, when analyzed under 
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions and the whole-person concept, 
mitigates the security concern based on foreign preference. 
 
Applicant surmised that identifying himself as a dual citizen might put him in a 
better bargaining position if he illegally overstayed his visa, but he admitted that he had 
never tried it. He stated that he would surrender his Greek citizenship if he were told 
that it was inconsistent with his obligations to the United States. However, he has not 
surrendered his Greek citizenship because he believes that it is useful for his business. 
He did not elaborate on the basis for his belief. The fact that Applicant’s business 
interests, rather than his political or ideological beliefs, are the reason for his failure to 
surrender his Greek citizenship, does not diminish the significance of his exercise of 
Greek citizenship. See ISCR Case No. 98-0477 at 4, 1999WL 1442363 (App. Bd. Dec. 
1999). Furthermore, a foreign preference under Guideline C is not limited to a 
preference for single foreign country over the United States. It can be shown by conduct 
showing an ad hoc situational preference for a foreign country over the United States. 
See ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12, 2001 WL 675725 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
On the other hand, several factors militate against a finding of foreign preference 
in this case. Applicant uses his U.S. passport to travel to and from Greece, he is limited 
to a 60-day visa like all other foreign travelers, and he uses an international driver’s 
license rather than a Greek license. He testified, without contradiction by any evidence 
presented by Department Counsel, that Greek citizenship is not required to own 
property or open a bank account, and that a U.S. passport would suffice for 
identification on his bank accounts, tax records, utility bills, and property records. His 
permanent home is in the United States, and most of his assets are in the United 
States. He served as a United States Coast Guard officer for three years and remained 
in the Coast Guard Reserve after completing his active duty. For almost 60 of his 66 
years of life, he has lived in the United States and exercised the rights and obligations 
of a U.S. citizen. He travels to Greece primarily on business and occasionally to visit his 
extended family, but he is a temporary visitor limited by his visa to a 60-day stay. In the 
context of all the evidence, the nominal benefits granted by a Greek identity card do not 
demonstrate Applicant’s preference for Greece over the United States. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant holds substantial business, financial and 
property interests in Greece (¶ 2.a), he has regular and ongoing contact with citizens 
and residents of Greece related to his business interests (¶ 2.b), he sits on the board of 
directors of a Liberian shipping company (¶ 2.c), and he has periodic and ongoing 
 
11 
 
 
contact with the Greek military attaché and other personnel at the Greek embassy in the 
United States (¶ 2.d).  
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): Connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(d): A substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has no contact with Liberia or its government, and he has no financial 
interest in the Liberian shipping company doing business in Greece. It appears that the 
shipping company is using Liberia as a flag of convenience for its ships. However, 
Applicant’s contacts with the Greek embassy establish AG ¶ 7(a), because those 
contacts could be used to influence him by enhancing or diminishing his ability to obtain 
freight forwarding contracts with the Greek Government. His connections to the Greek 
directors and owners of his U.S. based company, his connections to the Greece-based 
company, and his connections to the Liberian company doing business in Greece are 
sufficient to establish AG ¶ 7(b). His ownership interest in the Greece-based company 
and his real estate holdings in Greece establish AG ¶ 7(d). His Greek bank account, 
automobile, leased apartment, and utility accounts are all related to his business 
interests and have no independent security significance. 
 
12 
 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): The value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. The fluid and sometimes volatile 
nature of the relationships among governments, the unpredictable nature of the global 
economy, and the international competition to acquire U.S. technology preclude a 
finding that a potential conflict of interests is unlikely. 
 
13 
 
 
I also conclude that AG ¶ 8(f) is not established. Although Applicant is a wealthy 
man and the majority of his financial interests are in the United States, he still has 
substantial holdings in Greece. While he might not succumb to attempted influence, 
manipulation, or pressure, his substantial holdings present a potential conflict of interest 
that might subject him to pressure to act contrary to U.S. interests.  
 
However, I am satisfied that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of U.S. interest. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is established. His connections to 
the United States extend back to 1955, when his family left Greece and came to the 
United States. His commercial connections with Greece did not begin until 1992, after 
he had practiced law in the United States for 20 years and served as an officer in the 
U.S. Coast Guard. All his immediate family members are citizens and residents of the 
United States. He has sentimental attachment to his grandmother’s house and the 
farmland he inherited from his father, but its economic value is a small part of his total 
wealth. He is a temporary visitor in Greece; his permanent home is in the United States. 
He uses an international driver’s license to drive in Greece, rather than a Greek driver’s 
license. His exposure to the loss of his one-sixth interest in the Greek company is no 
greater than the risks taken by many other international investors, regardless of 
nationality. Given the volatility of the global economy, he has equal or greater risk of 
economic loss from his U.S.-based company.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant has held a security clearance without incident since December 1994. 
He and his partner disclosed their interests in the Greek-based company when they 
 
14 
 
 
applied for their initial clearance. Since receiving a clearance, their interest in the Greek-
based company has been reduced from a one-third interest to a one-sixth interest. 
Applicant surrendered his Greek passport after holding it since childhood, because he 
was advised that it raised security concerns. He notified security officials of his intent to 
obtain a Greek identity card, but received no indications that it would raise security 
concerns until he received the SOR. His longstanding and deep connections to the 
United States make it clear that he will resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence and foreign 
preference. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
