 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00282 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 21, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on December 7, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and he received it on December 15, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
submitted an undated two-page reply. The case was assigned to me on January 18, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations stated in the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He is married and has no children. Since April 2009, he 
has worked for a defense contractor. He is a high school graduate with some college. 
He became eligible for an interim security clearance on May 14, 2009.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana 
between 1996 and September 2009, including while holding an interim security 
clearance as of May 14, 2009; being charged with possession of marijuana and 
possession of drug paraphernalia on two occasions; receiving a diagnosis of cannabis 
abuse in remission while receiving treatment from August 2009 to April 2010 (See SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.d; 3.a); (2) providing false information about his past drug arrests and drug 
use when completing his security clearance questionnaire, when he was interviewed by 
a Department of Defense (DoD) investigator, and when he answered DOHA 
interrogatories (See SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e.).2 
  
 Applicant admits to twice-a-month marijuana use between 1998 and 2005. He 
used recreationally at parties with friends. He gave differing dates when he quit using 
marijuana prior to 2009. In June 2008, Applicant was stopped by local police. During the 
course of the stop, Applicant told the officer he had marijuana in the car. A search was 
conducted and over 4 grams of marijuana was discovered. Drug paraphernalia was also 
discovered. Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. 
The charges were ultimately dismissed after Applicant successfully completed a drug 
diversion program in June 2010.3 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant was stopped by local police for following another 
vehicle too closely. The arresting officer also had a drug dog who alerted on Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 13. 
 
2 Items 4, 5. 
 
3 Items 6, 10-11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
vehicle. Although no drugs were found, a wrapper that smelled of marijuana was found. 
Applicant was cited for possession of drug paraphernalia and paid a fine.4  
 
 As part of his court ordered substance abuse program from his 2008 drug arrest, 
Applicant received substance abuse treatment from August 2009 to April 2010. He was 
evaluated by a licensed clinical social worker. That evaluation diagnosed him as a 
cannabis abuser in full remission. The evaluator also noted his last use of marijuana 
was in September 2009.5  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance questionnaire on May 12, 2009. In that 
questionnaire, he was asked about whether he was charged with any prior drug or 
alcohol offense. He failed to list the 2008 arrest for possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia. He claimed that he was unaware he was arrested for the drug-related 
offenses at the time. The local police report specifically stated that he was informed he 
was being arrested for those drug-related charges. On the same questionnaire, 
Applicant was asked about the extent of his previous drug use. He failed to list any drug 
use after July 2003. Applicant used marijuana on a number of occasions through 
September 2009. He held an interim security clearance at the time of his last use.6 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant met with a DoD investigator and stated inter alia, he 
was not arrested for drug possession and drug paraphernalia possession in June 2008 
and he did not learn of the drug charges until June 2009. He also told the investigator 
the drugs found in his car in June 2008 did not belong to him. The local police report 
reflected that Applicant told the officer, “I have a little marijuana in the car”. He also told 
the investigator that his last use of marijuana was in 2004. Applicant also answered 
interrogatories from DOHA asking about his last use of marijuana and he claimed in 
those answers his last use was in “2004 – 2006 unrecalled”. Medical records from 
Applicant’s treatment show that his last use was in September 2009.7  
 
 Applicant acknowledges that he made many mistakes, but that he intends to 
learn from his mistakes and move on with his life. He asks for a second chance to 
undergo counseling and show that he deserves a security clearance.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
4 Item 12. 
 
5 Item 8. 
 
6 Items 4, 5, 12; Applicant’s FORM Response. 
 
7 Items 5-7; 10. 
 
8 Applicant’s FORM Response. 
 
 
4 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 Appellant used marijuana and possessed drug paraphernalia on a number of 
occasions including while holding a security clearance. I find that all the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant gave differing dates regarding when he stopped using 
marijuana, however all those dates preceded 2009. His medical records 
document his last use was in September 2009. Applicant’s short period of 
 
6 
 
 
abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the 
future. This is particularly so since his history shows he used marijuana over an 
extended period of time. Additionally, his use is recent and it is too soon to tell 
whether his use will recur. Neither AG ¶ 26(a) nor (b) applies. 
 
 Applicant was treated in a court-ordered drug treatment program. He was 
diagnosed as a cannabis abuser in remission. He successfully completed the 
program, but there is no record evidence showing his prognosis other than a 
comment that progress toward his goals was “good.” AG ¶ 26(d) partially applies.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
I find that Applicant intentionally gave false information on his security clearance 
application, to a DoD investigator, and in answering DOHA interrogatories. His 
explanation that he was unaware of the 2008 marijuana arrest is unpersuasive in light of 
the information contained in the related police report. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) apply to SOR 
 
7 
 
 
¶¶ 2.a - 2.d. Applicant’s use of marijuana while holding a security clearance created a 
vulnerability to his personal standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies to SOR ¶ 3.e.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Appellant’s drug use 
while holding a security clearance and his false statements. Neither are minor offenses 
and both cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness. Nothing about Applicant’s actions 
reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (e) do 
not apply.  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct. 
 
Applicant was found guilty of one marijuana and two drug paraphernalia 
offenses. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Sufficient time has not passed to show that Applicant’s drug use is behind him. 
Although he did successfully complete a drug treatment program, it is too early to tell 
whether Applicant will maintain his drug abstinence and therefore refrain from future 
criminal activity. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) do not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
expressed contrition and his desire for a second chance. However, I also considered 
that he used marijuana on multiple occasions, most recently while holding a security 
clearance, and that he gave false information about his past drug use on multiple 
occasions. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J Criminal Conduct. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
