                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 10-01655 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines B and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 8, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 5, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 26, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. The Government 
requested administrative notice be taken of HE I. I granted the request. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. He did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 3, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He immigrated to the United States from Guatemala 
with his twin brother when he was about 13 or 14 years old. His mother had immigrated 
in about 1991. He graduated from high school in the United States in 1998. In 2005, he 
enlisted in the U.S. Army. He was deployed and served in combat in Iraq from January 
2007 until April 2008. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in June 
2007. He intended to reenlist in the Army, but due to medical reasons he was not 
eligible. He received 60% medical disability. He remains in the inactive reserves. 
Applicant received an honorable discharge in 2009.1  
 
 Applicant married his wife in a civil ceremony in Guatemala in August 2008. His 
wife is a citizen and resident of Guatemala. They had a religious ceremony in April 
2009. In September 2008, Applicant’s twin brother passed away. This put a great deal 
of strain on his mother and she became ill. Applicant had planned on remaining in the 
military, but when he was no longer medically qualified, his future plans changed. With 
his twin brother’s passing, he felt he needed to remain at home to help his mother. 
Applicant did not want to move his wife to the United States until his future plans were 
firm. He submitted the paperwork for her to obtain a visa in October 2010. Once the visa 
is approved, his wife will move to the United States. She had previously applied for a 
U.S. visa and it was denied. Applicant stated that she was not informed why it was 
denied. He intends to remain in the United States with his wife and raise a family. When 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he obtained a passport. Since then, he used only his 
U.S. passport when he traveled to Guatemala. Applicant communicates with his wife 
daily, either by telephone or computer. His wife works as a travel agent and does not 
have ties to the Guatemalan government.2 
 
 When Applicant was a boy, he returned to Guatemala in the summers to visit 
family. Since 2005, he has returned five times. He has another brother and a sister who 
are citizens and residents of Guatemala. He has a close relationship with his siblings. 
He estimated he communicates with them about three times a week. His sister is about 
39 years old and a homemaker. She has visited Applicant in the United States two or 
three times. She has a child. Her husband works for a private company, but Applicant 
did not know the nature of the business. Applicant’s brother owns a hardware store and 
his wife works with him. Neither sibling has ties to the Guatemalan government. 
1 Tr. 26-29, 38-40, 80-82, 84. 
 
2 Tr. 25-26, 29-47, 89-92. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant intends to maintain contact with his family in Guatemala. He anticipates he will 
visit them in the future. His mother returns to Guatemala to visit once a year or every 
other year.3  
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Guatemala. His father-in-
law is a construction foreman. His mother-in-law is a homemaker. Applicant’s family and 
his wife’s family have been friends for many years. His wife lives with her parents. 
Applicant maintains regular contact with his parents-in-law.4 
 
 Applicant purchased a house in the United States about a month ago. He is 
attending college at night and has completed about 45 credits. He has cash assets of 
about $5,500 in his savings and checking accounts. He has been employed with a 
federal contractor since September 2009. He also maintains a bank account in 
Guatemala with about $150. He uses this account to send money to his wife. He also 
maintains many friendships in the United States through college and the military.5  
 
 Applicant has one delinquent debt for a credit card. He admitted that when he 
was younger he was careless about his finances. He last made a payment on this 
account in 2004. The original amount owed was about $7,000. He had periods of 
unemployment. At the time, he realized that even if he contacted the creditor he was not 
able to pay it. He received different forms of financial counseling while he was in the 
Army. He was counseled and advised about the importance of being fiscally 
responsible. When he returned from duty in Iraq, he realized that he needed to resolve 
this debt and he contacted the original creditor. He was advised that the debt was 
charged off and the creditor used it as a tax write-off. They told Applicant that they could 
not accept a payment. Applicant disputed the debt with a credit bureau so they would 
help him find who owned the debt. The credit bureau was unable to locate a collection 
company that owned the debt and determined the debt was deleted from the credit file. 
Applicant did not know how else to resolve the debt. He fully accepted responsibility that 
the debt belonged to him and he should have acted more responsibly before it became 
delinquent. However, since then he has made attempts to resolve it and has been 
unable. Despite his best efforts, he does not know how to settle the debt if he cannot 
find the company that owns the debt, and it is no longer on his credit file.6  
 
 
 
 
3 Tr. 32-34, 51-57, 84-85. 
 
4 Tr. 31, 57-58, 87-88. 
 
5 Tr. 48-51, 58-66, 80-83. 
 
6 Tr. 22-25, 43-44, 66-79; AE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Guatemala7 
 
 Guatemala is a constitutional democratic republic. The government is 
democratically elected. The United States and Guatemala traditionally have maintained 
close ties based on mutual interest in maintaining democratic institutions and combating 
elements of crime that have plagued the country, such as money laundering, corruption, 
narcotics trafficking, alien-smuggling, and other transnational crime. The United States 
and Guatemala maintain trade and commercial ties, cooperating in fostering 
Guatemala’s economic growth and development, and supporting Central-American 
integration.  
 
 The United States has played an important role in United Nations moderated 
peace accords, which were signed in 1996, and which form a blueprint for political 
economic and social change. However, relations between the United States and 
Guatemala are strained at times due to Guatemala’s human rights issues. Their 
problems consist of improper conduct by security forces, substantial inadequacies in the 
police and judicial sector, and serious criminal activity in the national police, including 
engagement in torture, abuse, and excessive force.  
 
 Guatemala faces one of the hemisphere’s most persistent security challenges 
and is considered one of the most dangerous countries in the hemisphere. Its weak 
institutions, corruption, and intimidation in the government create a widespread public 
distrust of the Guatemalan government that allows a variety of violent groups to operate 
with impunity, including drug traffickers and street gangs, both foreign and domestic. 
The weak criminal justice system, coupled with pervasive corruption, makes it difficult 
for the Guatemalan government to address the country’s deteriorating security system. 
The ineffectiveness of the Guatemalan government hinders efforts against transnational 
crime threats and has made the country a major alien smuggling route and a transit 
point for terrorists seeking to gain access to the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
7 HE I includes a summary and the source documents on the information regarding the country of 
Guatemala. 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has one delinquent debt of approximately $11,120 that was charged off 
and not paid. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that when he was younger he was careless about his 
finances and had a credit card that he could not pay. The original debt was about 
$7,000. He last made a payment on the debt in 2004. Applicant went into the Army and 
served in Iraq. While in the Army, he matured into a more responsible person, received 
financial counseling, and, upon his return from Iraq, he attempted to resolve the debt. 
He contacted the creditor and was advised the debt was charged off, the creditor had 
taken a tax loss, and could not accept a payment. He contacted a credit bureau to 
dispute the debt and determine if the debt was sold to a collection company. He was 
advised they could not find the debt and it was no longer on his credit file. Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
understood he was responsible for the debt and tried to determine if there is a current 
creditor. He was unsuccessful. The original creditor is not seeking payment and it does 
not appear the debt is held by a collection company. This is Applicant’s only delinquent 
debt. He admitted he was immature and fiscally irresponsible when he incurred the 
debt. That no longer appears to be the case, as he has taken legitimate steps to resolve 
the debt. I find the behavior happened long ago and was infrequent. He has matured 
and has an understanding of the importance of being fiscally responsible. I find his 
actions are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Therefore, I find that AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 The facts do not support application of AG ¶ 20(b) because there is no evidence 
that Applicant’s financial problem was beyond his control. Applicant has received 
financial counseling and through it he has gained an understanding about the 
importance of being fiscally responsible. After returning from duty in Iraq he attempted 
to resolve the debt was unable because it had been charged off. After researching the 
debt further Applicant has been unable to determine if there is a current creditor. He has 
attempted to resolve the debt. His other finances are under control and it appears this 
debt is no longer being pursued. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant did not dispute he 
owed the debt, and considering the age of the debt, I cannot find he made a good-faith 
effort to repay it. I find the facts do not support the application of AG ¶ 20(d) and 20(e).  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or person, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
Applicant’s wife, two siblings, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Guatemala. When he visits Guatemala, he stays with his wife and her family. I find due 
to his close relationship to his wife, siblings, and parents-in-law that this contact could 
potentially create a heightened risk of foreign influence. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) 
apply. Applicant maintains a bank account in Guatemala with a small balance. He uses 
the account to transfer money to his wife for living expenses. He owns a house in the 
United States and maintains his other assets here. The bank account does not equate 
to a substantial business, financial, or property interest which could subject Applicant to 
a heightened risk of foreign influence. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply. 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s wife, siblings, and parents-in-law are 
 
9 
 
 
citizens and residents of Guatemala. Applicant visits them periodically, and talks with 
them often. He anticipates future visits to Guatemala until his wife is granted a visa to 
move to the United States. His contact with them is frequent and more than casual. AG 
¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s relatives do not appear to have ties to the Guatemalan government. 
His wife works as a travel agent. His sister is a housewife whose husband is employed 
by a private company. His brother has a hardware business and his father-in-law is a 
construction foreman. It does not appear his relatives are reliant on the Guatemalan 
government. The United States maintains close relations with Guatemala. However, 
Guatemala has serious security challenges and is considered one of the most 
dangerous countries in the hemisphere. Its weak institutions, corruption, and 
intimidation in the government create a widespread public distrust of the Guatemalan 
government that allows a variety of violent groups to operate with impunity, including 
drug traffickers and street gangs, both foreign and domestic. The weak criminal justice 
system, coupled with pervasive corruption, makes it difficult for the Guatemalan 
government to address the country’s deteriorating security system. The ineffectiveness 
of the Guatemalan government hinders efforts against transnational crime threats and 
has made the country a major alien smuggling route and a transit point for terrorists 
seeking to gain access to the United States.  
 
Due to the nature of the country, the heightened security risk remains a security 
concern. Applicant travels to Guatemala and his wife lives there. The risk remains that 
Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
United States and those of his family in Guatemala. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) 
does not apply.  
  
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or there is a serious problem in the 
country with crime or terrorism.  
 
Guatemala has a democratically elected government and has close ties with the 
United States. Applicant’s family members do not appear to have any special 
connection with the Guatemalan government and do not rely on it for employment or 
other benefits. There is no evidence that Guatemala conducts intelligence operations 
against the United States. However, there is considerable evidence that Guatemala has 
serious problems with corruption, inadequacies with the police and judicial sector, 
violent crime, and an ineffective government in hindering major criminal threats, 
preventing alien smuggling routes, and blocking a transit point for terrorists seeking to 
gain access to the United States.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant became a citizen of the United States while serving his adopted 
country in the Army. He deployed and was in combat in Iraq and was medically 
discharged from the Army. His wife is awaiting the approval of her visa so she can move 
to the United States to be with him. His mother lives in the United States. He owns a 
house and almost all of his assets are in the United States. He is attending college. It is 
clear that his life is firmly rooted in the United States. It cannot be overlooked that 
Applicant’s ties to his wife, siblings, and parents-in-law in Guatemala are strong. 
Applicant has proven that he is deeply loyal to the United States. He has lived in the 
United States more than half of his life. He has been a citizen of the United States since 
2007. However, I find that there is a conflict of interest because Applicant is devoted to 
his wife and relatives and his sense of obligation to them is not minimal. This conflict will 
be immensely reduced when Applicant’s wife receives her visa and moves to the United 
States. At that point, Applicant ties to Guatemala will be significantly reduced and he 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest. 
However, at this time his devotion to his wife and family is too great to find in his favor. 
Therefore, I find AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant admitted that when he was young and immature he did not act fiscally 
responsible. He incurred a large credit card debt that he did not pay. After joining the 
Army and receiving financial counseling, he returned from a combat deployment with a 
new maturity. He attempted to resolve the debt, but was unable because it was charged 
off and he was unable to determine if there was a new creditor. Applicant has attempted 
 
11 
 
 
to resolve the debt. He has no other delinquent debts and this one does not rise to the 
level of being a security concern.  
 
Applicant served his adopted country in the Army and was medically discharged. 
He is employed and is attending college at night. He has lived in the United States since 
his early teens and he owns a home. Applicant clearly has strong ties and loyalties to 
the United States. However, he is also deeply committed to his wife, who is a citizen 
and resident of Guatemala. He is also close to his siblings and his wife’s parents. He is 
hopeful that his wife’s visa will be approved soon and she can move to the United 
States. His deep commitment to his wife is admirable and understandable. The conflicts 
that are raised by her citizenship and residency will be greatly reduced once she 
immigrates to the United States. Until then, despite Applicant’s loyalty and devotion to 
his adopted country, the heightened security risk and conflict of interest raised is not 
mitigated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns, but failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
