 
 
 
 
1
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case: 10-05029 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
On August 8, 2009, Applicant signed a Public Trust Position Application (SF 
85P). On October 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about November 1, 2010, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On December 22, 2010, DOHA 
 
 
 
 
2
issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for January 13, 2011.1 The case was heard 
as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) I, II 
and III into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
January 24, 2011.                
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 
¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.b, and denied the allegation contained in ¶ 2.a. Those admissions are 
incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and married. She and her husband have three children, 
ages 11, 7, and 5. After becoming a licensed registered nurse in July 1998, she worked 
for a nursing home for four months. In October 1998, she started a position at a hospital 
in the medical/surgical department. In November 2006, she was terminated from that 
position after the hospital discovered medication charting errors for controlled 
substances between November 1 and November 6, 2006.2 Applicant asserted that she 
was unable to complete the charting because of the hospital’s busy schedule that week. 
(AE I-B.) There is no evidence that she tested positive for marijuana or other controlled 
substances subsequent to the incident. After losing her position, Applicant moved to 
another city in January 2007 and began working at an outpatient clinic. At this time, she 
and her husband were separated. 
 
 On November 8, 2007, the state Nursing Board (Board) entered an order 
reprimanding and limiting her nursing license for misconduct and unprofessional 
behavior. The Board required her to complete three hours of continuing education in 
medication administration and documentation, and three hours in time management for 
health care providers. The Board required her to pay the $1,250 cost of investigating the 
matter, and ordered her to undergo a substance abuse evaluation. She complied with 
all terms of the order, including the evaluation which found that she did not have a 
substance abuse problem. (AE I.) 
 
 On May 12, 2009, Applicant tested positive for marijuana, in violation of her 
employer’s policy. She was terminated from her job on May 19, 2009. Applicant 
acknowledged using marijuana with family members the weekend before being tested 
for illegal controlled substances. (Tr. 39.) She admitted that she had also used it over a 
weekend in April 2009 while visiting the same family members. (Tr. 38.) 
 
                                            
1This case was formally assigned to me on January 11, 2011, after the Notice of Hearing issued.  
 
2Applicant denied the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 2.a because she negotiated a voluntary 
resignation from her position, rather than being fired. (Tr. 40.) However, a letter from her employer 
references its decision to terminate her employment, and makes no mention of a voluntarily resignation. 
(AE I-A.)  
 
 
 
 
3
 On July 22, 2010, the Board entered a second disciplinary order based on her 
misconduct and unprofessional behavior. It again reprimanded her and limited her 
nursing license until July 10, 2011. She completed another alcohol and drug abuse 
assessment, which found no evidence of a substance abuse problem. (Tr. 27.) 
According to the order, she is subject to random drug screenings and is prohibited from 
practicing in any other state. She was fined $150. (AE II-A.)  
    
 In August 2009, Applicant began a position as a Quality Assurance Specialist 
with a federal contractor that processes medical claims for military personnel. 
Applicant’s supervisor submitted a letter in support of Applicant. (AE III-C.) Her 
performance evaluations for 2009 and 2010 rated her as “Meets Expectations” in some 
categories and “Exceeds Expectations” in other categories. (AE III-D, III-E.) 
  
 Applicant began using marijuana at the age of 21. She has used it two to three 
times a year from January 1999 to May 12, 2009, while she and her husband were 
visiting family members in another city. (Tr. 25, 35, 38.) She testified that she never 
purchased it and did not use it during her three pregnancies. She has not used any 
other illegal drug. (Tr. 42.) Her relatives are aware of this situation and no longer use 
marijuana while she is present. (Tr. 29.) Her husband no longer uses marijuana 
because he realized the seriousness of this situation. (Tr. 28.) 
 
    Applicant expressed credible remorse over her misconduct and poor judgment. 
(Tr. 45.) She has undergone three random drug screenings: one when she started her 
new job in 2007, one in May 2009, and one after she started her current position in 
2009. Only the May 2009 screening was positive. (Tr. 32.) She has not participated in a 
drug rehabilitation program because she never received a recommendation to do so. 
(GE 2.) She recognized that her decision to continue using marijuana after her nursing 
license was restricted in 2007 demonstrated a lack of good judgment. (Tr. 43.) She 
does not intend to use marijuana again. She has learned an important lesson and is 
cognizant of the adverse effect it has had on her nursing career. (Tr. 30.)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, ADP II, and ADP III are classified as “sensitive 
positions.” (See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must 
be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the 
person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” 
(See Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense 
(Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates 
trustworthiness adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
 
 
 
4
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use. 
Applicant admitted that she illegally used marijuana from January 1999 to May 
12, 2009, when she tested positive for marijuana. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
both disqualifications. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 
 
 
6
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because Applicant used marijuana two or three times 
a year for approximately ten years, up to May 2009, less than two years ago. She 
voluntarily chose to use it while visiting family members. Those facts cast doubt on her 
current judgment. AG ¶ 26(b) has some mitigating application to Applicant’s illegal drug 
use. She does not intend to use marijuana again and no longer uses it with family 
members, including her husband, who has also stopped using the substance. There is 
no record evidence to trigger the application of AG ¶ 26(c) or AG ¶ 26(d).   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 (e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; and 
 
 
 
 
7
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
Applicant’s history of illegal marijuana use creates a vulnerability to duress as it 
is an activity, if known in the general public, which could affect her standing both 
professionally and personally. Applicant acknowledged that she violated her employer’s 
policies pertinent to illegal drug use in May 2009, and failed to comply with charting 
regulations pertaining to controlled substances in 2007. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise both disqualifying conditions as related to the allegations contained in the SOR.  
AG ¶ 17 includes four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply for the reasons set forth under the analysis of AG ¶ 
26(a) above. Applicant has candidly acknowledged her misconduct and visibly 
expressed remorse. She has not obtained counseling to address the factors that 
contributed to her long-term use of marijuana and would lend credibility to her 
assertions that she does not intend to use marijuana in the future. Hence, AG ¶ 17(d) 
does not apply. Applicant’s decision to cease using marijuana with family members is 
some evidence of a positive step she has taken to reduce her vulnerability to duress. 
However, because she did not provide any independent evidence to support her 
testimony, AG ¶ 17(e) and AG ¶ 17(g) have limited application. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
8
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a candid 34-year-
old registered nurse, who has received commendable performance evaluations for the 
past two years from her current employer. However, she has a ten-year history of 
illegally using marijuana two to three times a year with her husband and other family 
members. In two instances, she was disciplined and her nursing license was limited for 
allegations related to drug abuse and unprofessional conduct. In 2007, she was 
reprimanded for failing to properly chart narcotics and ordered to undergo a substance 
abuse evaluation. Although the evaluation did not disclose a substance disorder, the 
disciplinary process should have alerted her to the seriousness of illegally using 
marijuana and the potential negative consequence it could have on her career. It did 
not. She continued to use marijuana for more than two years. In May 2009, she lost 
another position. In July 2010, the Board again restricted her nursing license for failing a 
drug test and ordered that disciplinary status remain in effect until July 11, 2011. While 
she testified that she no longer uses marijuana, she did not present any independent 
evidence, such as random drug screenings, participation in a substance abuse 
rehabilitation program, or an independent evaluation from a licensed clinical social 
worker or physician with credentials in the field of addictions, to corroborate her 
testimony and diminish the likelihood of a recurrence. At this time, the record evidence 
leaves sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public 
trust position. Eligibility for access to ADPI/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
                                    
 
             _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
