1 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-00831
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Since about October 2000, Applicant has accrued nearly $42,000 in delinquent
debt. When he was interviewed about his debts in 2003 as part of a prior background
investigation, he claimed he would start paying off his debts the following month.
However, over the past seven years, Applicant has not taken sufficient action to pay or
otherwise resolve his debts. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
Applicant’s request for continued eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On June 6, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance required for his work as
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant interrogatories1 to clarify or augment information in the  background
investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant’s
2 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.
3 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 14 exhibits (Items 1 - 14) proffered in
support of the Government’s case.
2
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding2 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant
access to classified information. On July 9, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raised security concerns addressed
in the adjudicative guidelines3 (AG) under Guideline F (financial considerations).
On August 27, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR through a notarized
statement and requested a decision without a hearing. On November 16, 2010,
Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of the
Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on December 11,
2010, and was given 30 days to respond. Applicant did not respond and the case was
assigned to me on February 1, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $41,968 for
eight delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). Of the alleged debts, SOR 1.b
($15,262 for a car repossession), SOR 1.d ($9,385 for a car repossession), and SOR
1.g ($12,285 for a medical debt) constitute about 88% of Applicant’s total unpaid debt.
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted those allegations, as well as SOR 1.f
($4,237 for a medical debt). 
Applicant denied the allegations at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.h. In his denials of
SOR 1.a (collection account for $84) and 1.e ($405 medical debt), Applicant claimed he
had paid both debts and provided receipts in support of his SOR response. In denying
SOR 1.c (an unpaid medical bill for $172) and 1.h (an unpaid cell phone bill for $138),
Applicant did not provide any information, but in response to DOHA interrogatories
(FORM, Item 8), had averred that he could not verify any information about these debts.
In addition to the facts established through Applicant’s admissions, I have made the
following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 36 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that
requires access to classified information for him to perform his duties. He and his wife,
whom he married in March 1993, have three children, ages 18, 15, and 10. Applicant’s
wife also has one adult child from before their marriage. (FORM, Items 4 and 5)
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps (USMC) from
April 1993 until October 2000, when he was honorably discharged. In November 2000,
3
he affiliated with the USMC Reserve, where he was a drilling inactive reservist until
August 2006. (FORM, Item 5) Applicant first received a security clearance in 1993 in
connection with his military duties. (Id.) After Applicant was discharged from active duty,
he was employed as a test engineer by a temp agency until January 2003. (Id.)
Beginning in February 2002, the USMC began recalling Applicant for periods of
active duty to support the war effort in Iraq. Between recalls, he began working in the
civilian sector as a test technician in November 2004. Applicant was discharged from
the Marine Corps Reserve for medical reasons in August 2006. He had achieved the
rank of staff sergeant. In November 2007, Applicant left his test technician job to work
for a defense contractor supporting military intelligence training programs. He has held
his current job working at an overseas site since January 2009. (Id.)
In January 2003, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) to
renew his security clearance. In that SF 86, he disclosed two car repossessions
resulting in two debts totaling about $15,000. He also disclosed that he was more than
180 days past due on payments for a $13,000 consolidation loan, and on payments for
an $18,000 car loan. (FORM, Item 6) A credit report obtained as part of the ensuing
background investigation attributed to Applicant 12 delinquent or past-due debts totaling
approximately $58,104. (FORM, Item 15) 
In July 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator about his
finances. In the interview, Applicant said his financial problems started when he left the
USMC in October 2000. He and his wife had not managed their finances properly and
the reduction in income after he was discharged left them unable to meet all of their
financial obligations. Applicant averred that he would start paying or otherwise resolving
his debts in August 2003. He also provided a personal financial statement (PFS) that
showed he had about $1,100 remaining each month after all of his expenses, including
claimed monthly payments to ten past-due accounts. (FORM, Item 14)
In July 2005, Applicant submitted another Security Clearance Application (SF
86). He again disclosed two car repossessions totaling about $15,000. He also
disclosed the delinquent $13,000 consolidation loan, but did not disclose the delinquent
$18,000 car loan that was listed on his 2003 SF 86. (FORM, Item 5) A credit report
obtained in August 2005 showed that Applicant owed approximately $38,891 for nine
delinquent or past-due debts. (FORM, Item 13) 
In June 2009, after Applicant submitted his e-QIP, a credit report was obtained,
which showed that he owed about $59,634 for 16 delinquent or past-due debts. The
report also showed that Applicant was at least 120 days past due on both mortgages on
his home totaling $482,032, and that he had six student loans in deferment totaling
about $24,000. (FORM, Item 12) 
Applicant disclosed in his e-QIP that his home mortgages were foreclosed. He
also disclosed three car repossessions. (FORM, Item 4) In disclosing his financial
delinquencies in his e-QIP, Applicant explained that his debts arose due to
unemployment. In Section 13A (Employment / Unemployment Information), Applicant
did not list any periods of unemployment. (Id.)
5 Directive. 6.3.
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).
4
Applicant was interviewed about his finances by a Government investigator in
December 2009. He agreed that the debts listed in his credit report were accurate. He
repeated his claim that his financial problems began while he was in the military. He
also placed some of the blame for his financial problems on his wife’s inability to
manage money, and he claimed that he had taken control of their finances to resolve
their debts. He again stated that he intended to pay his debts. (FORM, Item 7) In his
SOR response, Applicant claimed that his debts will be paid off by the middle of 2011,
but he has not yet provided any information that would show how he plans to do so.
(FORM, Item 3)
In response to DOHA interrogatories in May 2010, Applicant submitted an
updated PFS. It showed that he has about $6,000 remaining each month after paying all
of his expenses. However, he did not include repayment of any of his debts with his
expenses. (FORM, Item 8)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).
5
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.7 
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government presented sufficient information in the FORM to support the
allegations in the SOR. Applicant has experienced significant financial problems since at
least October 2000. Available information shows that he still owes at least $40,000 for
unpaid medical debts, and at least two car repossessions. Despite an earlier
investigation about his unpaid debts in 2003, Applicant has not acted to pay or
otherwise resolve his debts. Further, Applicant has lost a home to foreclosure, and he
has yet to begin paying several student loans currently in deferral. Available information
raises a security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy   debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. 
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶ 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one's
means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash
flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis).
9 See footnote 5, supra.
10 See footnote 8, supra. 
6
Applicant has the means to repay his debts, and he is credited with repaying the
debts at SOR 1.a and 1.e. However, he did not submit any information showing that he
has begun addressing his other, more significant debts. Along with his admission of the
largest of his debts (SOR 1.b), Applicant submitted a copy of a notice regarding a class-
action lawsuit against that creditor. The notice shows that Applicant may be part of a
class of consumer plaintiffs whose obligations to pay deficiencies after car
repossessions would be eliminated through remedies sought from the defendant
creditor. Applicant expects the outcome of the suit will eliminate Applicant’s liability for
the $15,262 debt attributed to him from a car repossession. However, he did not submit
information about when the suit was filed, when it would be resolved, or other indication
of the likelihood of success in obtaining the proposed remedies. It would be speculative,
at best, to conclude that Applicant is no longer liable for this debt. 
More to the point, Applicant has not demonstrated that he has improved his
personal financial management practices so that he will not be a security risk in the
future. Despite having significant cash on hand each month after expenses, he has not
established a repayment plan or provided information showing he is negotiating with his
creditors to resolve his obligations. Nor did he support his claims regarding the causes
(unemployment, his wife’s actions, etc.) of his debts. By contrast, available information
shows that Applicant did not manage his money during his first USMC tour of duty, and
that he has not done anything since 2000 to resolve his financial problems. Granted, he
has paid two of his smaller delinquencies. But there is no indication that he is willing to
enter into any organized arrangements with his other creditors to resolve their claims
against him. Finally, with the advent of his student loan obligations, his financial
obligations will only increase absent any action to resolve his past debts. 
On balance, the record does not support application of any of the mitigating
conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns about
his finances.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 36 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He served his country in the USMC active
and reserve components. He is also employed in direct support of the military overseas.
However, there is no other information that supports any of the whole-person factors at
AG ¶ 2(a). His financial problems are ongoing, and there is little indication that they will
abate anytime soon. A fair and commonsense assessment9 of all available information
shows about Applicant’s finances sustains the doubts about Applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
national interest.10
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.d, 1.f - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
