 
 1 
 
 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                                 ) 
               )   
       )  ISCR Case No. 10-01315 
                  ) 
                        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                        ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
alcohol consumption. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) dated October 28, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were 
 
 2 
                                                
unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
On August 25, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR dated September 7, 2010, in which he 
admitted all the SOR allegations. Applicant requested a decision before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 1, 2010, 
and the case was assigned to me on October 7, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on October 18, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 4, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, I admitted eight exhibits offered by Department Counsel and 
identified as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. I also admitted ten exhibits offered 
by Applicant, identified as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J. I held the record open to 
allow Applicant to submit further documentation. He timely submitted one document, 
which I admitted as AE K. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 15, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 34 years old, received a bachelor’s degree in 1999. He has been 
married since 2004 and has a four-month-old son and a 23-month-old daughter. He has 
worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 2000. His position is 
business development coordinator. He has held a secret security clearance since 2002. 
(GE 1, 6; AE G; Tr. 32-33, 37) 
 
Applicant started consuming alcohol in approximately 1994, when he was 17 
years of age. He drank beer with friends every few months. In college, he began to drink 
two or three times per week, two to four beers at a time. After college, he often went to 
“happy hours” with his friends or his wife. About once per month, he drank by himself; 
sometimes he drove after drinking. In his January 2008 security interview, Applicant said 
he intended not to drive after drinking, and not to drink in the future. He also noted that 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations 
in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
he planned to stop drinking before starting his family, but he had no immediate need to 
stop drinking. (GE 2) 
 
On a weeknight in January 2007, when he was 30 years old, Applicant went 
drinking with friends and co-workers. He drank five or six beers during a three-hour 
period. While driving home, he was stopped for speeding. The police detected an odor of 
alcohol, and Applicant failed the subsequent sobriety test. He was arrested by police on 
a charge of Driving While under the Influence of alcohol (DWI). His blood alcohol content 
(BAC) was approximately 0.17. In March 2007, he was given probation before judgment. 
He was required to abstain from alcohol for one year, March 2007 to March 2008, which 
he did. He served six months of supervised probation, followed by six months of 
unsupervised probation, which ended in March 2008. Applicant was ordered to attend a 
Victim Impact Panel, and to complete 26 sessions of alcohol counseling. He was also 
required to have an ignition interlock system installed on his car for one year. Applicant 
met the conditions of his probation. (GE 1, 2, 6, 7; Tr. 38-41) 
 
Applicant was evaluated at an addictions center in January 2007. He testified that 
his alcohol counseling showed him that he should be more responsible in his alcohol 
use, and that he should not drive after drinking. He also realized he had a problem with 
binge drinking. He felt he did not drink often, but when he did, he would drink “far too 
much.” He decided to change his habits to eliminate attending happy hours. He tried to 
arrange his life to avoid having to drive after drinking, but as he lives in a non-metro 
area, “that was only somewhat successful.” He had been married about three years at 
that time, and he decided to focus more on his family. A licensed clinical social worker 
submitted a letter indicating that Applicant successfully completed the individual and 
group sessions in April 2007. Applicant completed a security clearance application in 
August 2007, in which he disclosed his arrest. (GE 5, 6; AE D, E; Tr. 40-41) 
 
During the 20 months between the end of his probation in March 2008 and his 
second arrest in November 2009, Applicant drank alcohol to the point of intoxication 
three or four times. He did not drink for approximately 16 months, which included the 
twelve months of abstinence ordered by the court. He stated in his security interview of 
January 2008 that he intended not to drink again, but if he did, he definitely would not 
drive after drinking. He testified that that was definitely his intent at the time. Two of 
Applicant's friends, who have known him for more than four years, submitted letters 
noting that after his first DWI, they did not see him drink alcohol on social occasions. 
After his period of abstention, he decided that he could drink responsibly on occasion. In 
his security interview of December 2009, Applicant stated he believed he should have 
attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) after his first arrest, but was too proud to do so. 
(GE 2; AE H; Tr. 43-46) 
 
Applicant's probation ended in March 2008. His first child was born in March 
2009. He had been seeing a psychiatrist a few times per year since 2002 for a mood 
disorder, and was taking medication. In July 2009, Applicant increased the frequency of 
 3
 
his visits to his doctor because of work-related stress.3 In October 2009, Applicant 
completed another security clearance application. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 34-37) 
 
On November 14, 2009, Applicant went out with several friends to a bar. He told 
his wife that he did not plan to drink much. He had made arrangements with his friend, 
M, to spend the night at M’s home so that he, Applicant, would not need to drive home 
after drinking. M was aware of Applicant's prior DWI. After drinking beer for four to five 
hours, Applicant and M argued on the way to M’s house at the end of the evening. M 
refused to let Applicant spend the night. M submitted a letter confirming Applicant's 
description of events. Applicant did not have money for a cab, and did not think of calling 
his wife or family for help. He went to a bar, but was refused entry because he was 
intoxicated. When he left in his car, a bar employee alerted the police. Applicant was 
arrested and charged with DWI. His BAC was 0.17. Applicant reported the charge to his 
security officer and his manager. (GE 2, 8; AE H; Tr. 48-57, 62, 80)  
 
After the November 2009 arrest, Applicant was evaluated at the same addiction 
treatment center he attended after his first arrest. A licensed clinical alcohol and drug 
counselor (LCADC) recommended that he resume treatment. He attended 26 weeks of 
group and individual counseling, starting November 16, 2009. He successfully completed 
the program on May 12, 2010. The LCADC noted in a 2010 letter that Applicant's 
attendance and participation were excellent, that he reported “ongoing abstinence,” and 
had “re-evaluated his relationship with alcohol.” Applicant also began attending AA in 
December 2009, shortly before his security interview. He testified that he attended until 
just before his son was born in September 2009. He provided evidence of attendance 
from December 2009 to June 2010. As of the hearing date, he no longer attended AA. 
He “technically” had a sponsor, and had contacted him the week before the hearing. 
Applicant had not decided how he will incorporate it into his life in the future. He has 
mixed feelings about AA, but considers it a “good reminder” of what could happen if he 
does not “stay on the straight and narrow.” He sometimes felt out of place at AA. He 
noted that his wife does not believe in its efficacy. (AE D, J; Tr. 58-68) 
 
Applicant had a security interview in December 2009, before his court date. He 
told the interviewer that he believes he is an alcoholic and a binge drinker. His father, 
who is now deceased, was alcohol dependent. His brother is now sober, after having 
been alcohol dependent. Because of this history, maintaining a sober home for his 
children is very important. He plans not to drink alcohol in the future. He explained that 
after the second DWI, he voluntarily returned to the addiction center he previously 
attended. He also attended AA for the first time in December 2009. Applicant attended 
approximately weekly from December 2009 to June 2010. (GE 2; AE J; Tr. 46-47)   
 In June 2010, Applicant pled “Not Guilty” to the November 2009 charge. He was 
found guilty of Driving/Attempting to Drive While Impaired by Alcohol, and was fined. He 
was sentenced to 60 days incarceration, suspended, and placed on one-year probation. 
His probation is supervised, and Applicant sees his probation officer monthly. His 
probation will end on June 28, 2011. He attended a Victim Impact Panel. Applicant also 
                                                 
3 His doctor noted that Applicant has responded well to treatment. (AE C) 
 4
 
attended the compulsory Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) hearing in March 2010 and 
was ordered to have an ignition interlock system installed on his car for 12 months. At his 
court hearing in June 2010, an additional six months was added to his ignition interlock 
requirement, so that he was required to have it attached for a total of 18 months. It was 
installed on April 1, 2010 and will be removed in approximately October 2011. (AE A, B, 
F; Tr. 57-60) 
 Applicant's wife testified that Applicant’s problem drinking occurs usually when he 
is with his friends. She testified, “. . . what I call a college mindset and goes and gets 
drunk kind of kicks in, and he consumes just too much at that time.” She also said he no 
longer drinks alcohol. In the period between the two DWIs, he drank occasionally, but not 
often. She drinks occasionally, usually on holidays. However, she drank wine several 
times per week during the period when her son was a newborn and she was stressed 
with caring for two babies, in about October 2010. As of the hearing date, she intended 
to reduce her intake because her baby was two months old and she was not as stressed. 
(Tr. 82-86) 
 Applicant's co-worker testified that they have known each other for about one-
and-one-half years, and they see each other several times per week. On the one 
business trip they took together, he saw Applicant drink only iced tea. He has never seen 
Applicant drink alcohol. Applicant's third witness has known him for 18 years. He knows 
Applicant reduced his alcohol use considerably after the first DWI, and did not drive after 
drinking. He has not seen Applicant drink alcohol since the first DWI. They did not 
associate often after Applicant's second DWI because of work commitments. (Tr. 86-97)  
 
Two of Applicant's co-workers submitted character letters. One, who had known 
him for two years, describes him as conscientious worker who is a significant company 
asset. He is aware of Applicant's history with alcohol, but believes it will not be a 
recurring problem. Another co-worker opined that Applicant pays close attention to 
security procedures, and is reliable. He is aware of Applicant’s history and believes he 
has resolved his alcohol issues. (AE H) 
  
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 5
 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
the cited guideline.   
 
 A security clearance decision resolves only the question of whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of producing 
admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to 
an applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution 
of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern about alcohol consumption is that “excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Guideline G, AG ¶ 
22, especially the following: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 6
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication on numerous occasions 
over the past 20 years. He drove after becoming intoxicated and was subsequently 
arrested and convicted of DWI in 2007 and Driving While Impaired in 2009. He 
participated in an alcohol treatment program following both arrests. AG ¶ 22(d) and (f) 
are not relevant because, although Applicant submitted a statement from his treatment 
center, it did not indicate that Applicant had received a diagnosis as to his use of 
alcohol. These facts support application of AG ¶¶ 22 (a) and (c). 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides the following relevant factors that can mitigate security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related behavior was frequent: he drank alcohol several times 
per week in college. Once he started working full time, he continued to drink alcohol, not 
under unusual circumstances, but in common situations such as happy hours, with his 
wife and friends, and sometimes by himself. At times, Applicant became intoxicated. He 
admitted that he sometimes drove while intoxicated. On two of those instances, he was 
arrested. Applicant demonstrated extremely poor judgment by driving after becoming 
intoxicated. His negative alcohol-related conduct was both frequent and recent. The fact 
that it occurred in common situations that he enjoyed raises the possibility that it might 
 7
 
recur. His two DWIs in three years reflect poorly on his judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not 
apply. 
 
The record does not contain evidence that Applicant received a diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence. However, because he acknowledges that he 
engaged in binge drinking and that he Is unable to limit himself when he drinks with his 
friends, he has been abstinent for about one year. AG ¶ 23(b) applies. 
 
Applicant completed 26 sessions of an alcohol treatment program in 2007. 
Applicant abstained from alcohol for more than one year after his first DWI, as required 
by the terms of his probation. The counseling did not achieve the desired effect, as he 
returned to drinking, and had a second DWI. He completed another 26-week series in 
2009-2010, as recommended by an alcohol counselor. His counselor gave him a 
positive evaluation in May 2010. Applicant is abstinent and attended AA. However, he 
no longer attends AA, and has mixed feelings about it. AG ¶ 23 (d) applies in part.  
 
Taking all the facts and circumstances together, including the short duration of 
Applicant's abstinence, the mitigation available is insufficient to overcome the 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant provided evidence of positive factors in his life: he has maintained 
steady employment with a federal contractor for ten years; he is in a stable marriage, 
with two children; and his friends and co-workers attest to his reliable and conscientious 
job performance. Also, Applicant had abstained from alcohol for about one year, as of 
 8
 
 9
the date of the hearing. However, Applicant abstained from alcohol in the past, during 
his first probationary period. At that time, he told a security investigator that his intention 
was never to drink alcohol again. But he returned to excessive drinking. Moreover, his 
drinking and arrests occurred while he held a security clearance. His current short 
period of sobriety also must be compared to the long time period that he abused 
alcohol. In the past, he continued to drink alcohol despite the negative effects it caused. 
Applicant's decisions to drink and drive posed a danger to himself and others. Applicant 
is still on probation, and will be until June 2011. He is still required to have an ignition 
interlock device on his car, which will remain until October 2011. At this point in time, I 
cannot conclude that Applicant's relatively short period of abstinence will continue after 
his probation and ignition interlock period are complete.  
 
 Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the alcohol 
consumption guideline. Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
