1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-00286
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 3, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On June 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline C for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 12, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
September 24, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 29, 2010, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 17, 2010. The Government offered
Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received and admitted without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through G, which were also
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
December 1, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
2
December 8, 2010, to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted three
additional documents, which have been identified and entered into evidence collectively
as Exhibit H. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of
Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. 1) and 3), and he denied
1.a. 2). The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 25 years old. His mother was born in Mexico, and his father is from
the Netherlands. Applicant’s parents now reside in the United States. Applicant was
born in Mexico, where he lived for a few months, when he moved to the Netherlands
with his parents. After two years, Applicant moved with his parents back to Mexico. In
approximately 1990, after one year in Mexico, Applicant moved with his parents to the
United States, and he has lived in the U.S. since then.  Applicant became a United
States citizen on February 27, 2001, under the child citizen act, because his mother
became a United States citizen on September 28, 1990.  Applicant also been a Mexican
citizen since birth. His father became a United States citizen on June 25, 2005.
Applicant has two brothers, ages 22 and 15; the older was born in Mexico and
the younger was born in the United States. Both of his brothers are United States
citizens and reside in the United States. Applicant is not married and has no children.
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference) 
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant exercised dual citizenship by:
1) Possessing a passport from the Netherlands (Dutch) that was issued in about
October 2008 and will not expire until October 2013. Applicant testified that he is a
Dutch citizen solely because his father is a Dutch citizen, and he first received the Dutch
passport through an application by his father.
2) Possessing a passport from the Netherlands that was issued after he became
a United States citizen on August 1, 2008. Applicant testified that he actually became a
United States citizen on February 27, 2001, rather than August 1, 2008. The SOR was
amended to reflect that Applicant became a citizen on February 27, 2001, and Applicant
thereafter admitted this allegation. (Tr at 24.)
3
In 2008, Applicant renewed his Dutch passport because it was easier to travel in
the European Union with a Dutch passport, and it also made it easier to work as an
intern on scholarship in Germany with that passport. (Tr at 37-38.)
2) Using a passport from the Netherlands instead of his United States passport,
after he became a United States citizen, for travel to Europe from the United States and
between European countries.
Applicant testified that in May or June 2010, he contacted a representative from
the Dutch embassy that he wanted to have his Dutch passport invalidated. He sent his
passport to them, and holes were punched in it by the Dutch Government to invalidate
it. (Tr at 39-42.) Exhibit A consists of a copy of the invalidated Dutch passport. 
While it was not listed on the SOR, Applicant did previously have a Mexican
passport, but he testified that it expired in 1991, and he never renewed it. The only
passport he continues to maintain is the one from the United States, which does not
expire until August 3, 2013. (Tr at 43-44.) Applicant indicated that he had not
considered renouncing his Dutch citizenship since no mention was made in the SOR of
his Dutch citizenship, but if the Government wanted him to renounce his Dutch
citizenship he would be willing to do so. (Tr at 64.) 
Applicant has not taken part in any Dutch elections. He does not own any
property there or stand to inherit anything in the Netherlands. He also testified that he
has registered with the Selective Service in the United States. (Tr at 73.)
 Mitigation
Applicant submitted four positive character letters in Exhibit H. The first letter was
from a co-worker, who described Applicant as “very trusting, reliable, loyal, and
conscientious towards his work.” A second letter was from a former high school teacher
of Applicant, who has known Applicant for approximately 10 years.  He wrote that
Applicant “always exhibited the highest standards of integrity and moral character.”
Applicant was also described in extremely laudatory terms by a former supervisor in
college and by an attorney, who is a friend of Applicant’s family. 
Applicant also submitted his academic transcript, confirming that he graduated
Cum Laude in 2007 with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Aerospace Engineering, and
in 2008 he received a Master of Science Degree in Aerospace Engineering.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
 Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
5
Applicant’s application and receipt of a passport from the Netherlands raises
foreign preference concerns under Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10 (a) as the “exercise
of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship.”
However, Applicant did invalidate his foreign passport, by delivering it to a Dutch
government representative, who then invalidated it.  While Applicant did not renounce
his Dutch  citizenship to the authorities, he did indicate that he would do so if it was
requested of him. Therefore, I find that Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 11 (b) and (e) apply
to this case. After considering all of the evidence of record under Guideline C, I
conclude that the mitigating evidence substantially outweighs the disqualifying evidence.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case under Guideline C. Based on all of
the reasons cited above as to why the Mitigating Conditions apply, considered with the
very laudatory descriptions of Applicant from the writers of the submitted letters, plus his
excellent college records, I find that the evidence leaves me with no significant
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.1) - 3): For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
