 
 
 
 
1
                                                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ADP Case: 10-02917 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffries, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
ADP I/II/III sensitive information is granted. 
 
On September 1, 2009, Applicant completed a Public Trust Position Application 
(SF 85P). On September 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 30, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On November 12, 2010, DOHA assigned the 
case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for December 9, 2010. The 
 
 
 
 
2
case was heard as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence without objection. The record remained open 
until December 30, 2010, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted two documents that I marked as AE E and F and 
admitted into evidence without objection.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 19, 2010.                                                         
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Jordan. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
Jordan are included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, along with six attachments 
numbered I through VI. Those documents were admitted by stipulation. (Tr. 12.) The 
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and pertinent 
to Jordan, and not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR ¶ 
1 and ¶ 2, and provided information in support of his answers.  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He was born in Jordan. He went to high school there. 
In June 1993, he earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science from a Jordanian 
university. After graduation, he worked for the Jordanian airline company until 1998 
when he immigrated to the United States and began working for a U.S. company as a 
program analyst.  In August 2002, he started a position as an information analyst with 
another company. In September 2009, he obtained his current position with a federal 
contractor. He is a senior program analyst. He became a permanent U.S. registered 
alien in 2003 and a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2008. He obtained a U.S. 
passport in November 2008. (Tr. 41-42.)  
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Jordan. They were married in Jordan, before 
immigrating to the United States in 1998. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
October 2008. She is an architect/engineer. She traveled to Jordan in August 2010. He 
does not know if his wife’s Jordanian passport is valid. (Tr. 50.) They have two children, 
ages six and ten, both born in the United States. They have U.S. passports. 
 
 Applicant does not own any property or assets in Jordan. (Tr. 26-27.) He and his 
wife have bank accounts and retirement funds in the United States. (Tr. 27.) They rent a 
house and would like to build a home here in the future. They are involved in their 
children’s school activities (Tr. 28.)   
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Jordan. His father retired from the military 
before he died 14 years ago. His elderly mother is a citizen and resident of Jordan. She 
 
 
 
 
3
was a homemaker while he was growing up. He speaks to his mother every couple 
days. (Tr. 37.) She and one of his sisters visited him in the United States sometime ago. 
The only reason he visits Jordan is to see his mother. He is helping her immigrate to the 
United States. (Tr. 57.) If she moves to the United States, he will not have any reason to 
return to Jordan. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 Applicant is one of five children, all born in Jordan. His three sisters are citizens 
and residents of Jordan. They are housewives and their husbands are in business. (Tr. 
32.) He does not know his brothers-in-law very well because his sisters married after he 
left Jordan. (Tr. 33.) He speaks to his sisters if they are at his mother’s home when he 
telephones. They live an hour away from her. (Tr. 37.) His brother is a resident of 
Oman. He is married and has three children. He works as an engineer. (Tr. 33.) He 
speaks to his brother occasionally. (Tr. 37.)  
 
  Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and residents of Jordan. They are retired. (GE 2.) 
His father-in-law graduated from a U.S. university. Applicant does not know his 
occupation. (Tr. 35.) His in-laws spend time between Jordan and Canada. They are 
becoming Canadian citizens. He does not think that his wife speaks with her parents 
very frequently. (Tr. 51.) They visited Applicant in either 2003 or 2006. (Tr. 38.) 
Applicant’s wife has one brother and four sisters. Her brother and three sisters reside in 
Canada. (Tr. 36-37.) One sister resides in Egypt. (Tr. 36.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Jordan to visit his family in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 
2008, and September 2009. He usually visits two to three weeks and stays with his 
mother. (Tr. 39.) Upon his arrival in Jordan in September 2009, an immigration officer 
asked if he had a Jordanian passport. Applicant had his expired passport with him 
because it was in a passport bag amongst his children’s U.S. passports. (Tr. 43, 49, 
50.)  The officer stamped the expired passport and told Applicant that he would need to 
renew it in order to leave the country. Applicant had no intention to renew the passport. 
It is valid until September 2014. (AE F.) He has no plans to take the passport with him 
again. (Tr. 46.) He did not know that it was necessary for him to destroy it for 
employment purposes. (Tr. 48.) During a March 2010 interview with a government 
investigator, he expressed his willingness to relinquish his Jordanian passport and 
citizenship. (GE 2.) During the hearing, he renounced his Jordanian citizenship. He 
volunteered to destroy the Jordanian passport. (Tr. 49.) On December 14, 2010, 
Applicant’s security office verified that he had destroyed the passport. (AE F.) 
 
 Applicant expressed his loyalty to the United States. He considers himself an 
American citizen and not a Jordanian citizen. (Tr. 49.) The United States is his home. 
(Tr. 29.) He submitted two documents certifying that in 2010 he completed business 
courses required by his employer. (AE A.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Jordan1 
 
Jordan’s government is a constitutional monarchy. It is ruled by a King, has a 
Council of Ministers selected by the King, and has a partially elected bicameral National 
Assembly. It has followed a pro-Western foreign policy and has had close ties with the 
United States for six decades. It is an ally of the United States in the war on terror. 
 
Jordan’s human rights record continues to reflect problems. Issues include 
torture, arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement of 
privacy rights, political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly, association, and movement. Torture by the police and security forces is 
widespread.  
 
Jordanian law allows any male relative to prevent a woman or child from leaving 
Jordan, even if they are U.S. citizens. Dual citizens are subject to certain obligations, 
including mandatory military service for males less than 37 years. Jordan treats dual 
citizens as Jordanian citizens under the law and it may not inform the U.S. embassy if a 
dual Jordanian-American citizen experiences problems while in Jordan.  
 
The threat of terrorism in Jordan is high and westerners are specifically targeted. 
Al-Qaida focuses terrorist activities against both the U.S. and Jordan. Specifically, Al-
Qaida claimed responsibility for the bombings of three hotels in Jordan, a rocket attack 
targeting a U.S. naval ship, and the assassination of an American diplomat. Jordan’s 
State Security Court convicted and sentenced three individuals, first to death, but then 
commuted the sentences to 15 years each, for plotting to assassinate President George 
W. Bush, during his November 2006 trip to Jordan. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for. 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
                                            
1 HE I. 
 
 
 
 
5
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, and then he or she may be prone 
 
 
 
 
6
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was born in Jordan. He arrived in the United States in 1998 and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2008. He obtained a U.S. passport in 
November 2008. In September 2009, he used his expired Jordanian passport to enter 
Jordan, resulting in the necessity that he renew it in order to exit the country. He 
possessed that passport until December 14, 2010, when it was destroyed. The 
Government produced substantial evidence of the above two disqualifying conditions 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate these facts 
and resulting security concerns.  
 AG ¶ 11 provides three conditions that could mitigate said security concerns: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant’s Jordanian citizenship was based on his parents’ citizenship and his 
birth in Jordan. Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his Jordanian citizenship 
and destroy his passport before and during the hearing. In December 2010, he 
surrendered his Jordanian passport to his employer, who destroyed it. Accordingly, the 
above mitigating conditions apply to the security concerns that were raised. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 and, 
 (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
Since leaving Jordan in 1998, Applicant has maintained contact with his mother, 
three sisters, and parents-in-law, who are citizens and residents of Jordan, a close and 
long-term ally of the United States. Jordan works closely with the United States on 
many matters and shares common strategic interests. But it also continues to have 
some human rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and has terrorists’ 
organizations operating in the country, which target the United States for intelligence 
collection through human espionage and other means. This creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. None of 
Applicant’s family has connections with the Jordanian government or have positions in 
which they could otherwise benefit from his access to sensitive information or 
technology. However, under either disqualifying condition, a potential conflict of interest 
could arise for Applicant and his security obligations in a situation wherein his family 
                                            
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
8
members were taken hostage or otherwise threatened with harm if he did not cooperate 
with terrorists or their governments.  AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence. 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides three conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns:  
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
None of Applicant’s family members residing in Jordan are in positions or 
activities in which they could benefit from obtaining sensitive information from the United 
States. While their physical presence in Jordan could create a potential conflict for 
Applicant, requiring him to choose between safeguarding their interests versus those of 
the United States, Jordan’s pro-Western foreign policy for over six decades diminishes 
the likelihood of that happening. In addition, Jordan has been an important and strategic 
partner with the United States in the war on terror over those years. AG ¶ 8(a) has some 
application. 
Based on his relationships in, and depth of loyalty to, the United States, Applicant 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. He has 
lived in the United States since 1998 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. He 
has worked for U.S. companies since 1998 when he arrived in the United States. His 
wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing here. His two children were born in the United 
States. He and his wife are active in their children’s activities. They are bank accounts 
here and intentions to build a home. He does not have financial interests in Jordan. 
There is no evidence that that he has connections or contact with any people in Jordan 
other than his immediate family members, in particular his mother. He considers himself 
an “American.” Because Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for just over two years at the 
time of the hearing, AG ¶ 8(b) is not fully applicable.  
 
Applicant maintains ongoing communication with his mother, and occasionally 
with his sisters. He visited his family seven times since leaving Jordan in 1998. Hence, 
 
 
 
 
9
AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply, as those contacts have been sufficiently frequent and not 
casual over the years.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a public trust position must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal 
Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or 
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Three circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, there is a risk of terrorism and human 
rights abuses in Jordan. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists in the country 
are hostile to the United States and actively seek sensitive information. Terrorists could 
attempt to use Applicant’s mother, three sisters, and in-laws to obtain such information. 
Second, he had numerous connections to Jordan before he immigrated to the United 
States in 1998. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there. He was educated 
at a Jordanian university and after graduation worked for a Jordanian company. Third, 
since leaving Jordan in 1998, he visited his family in Jordan in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 
2007, 2008, and 2009. He carried his expired Jordanian passport with him for his last 
trip, resulting in its renewal after he obtained U.S. citizenship and passport.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant access to 
sensitive information. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 12 
years and has been a naturalized citizen since 2008. His wife has lived here with him 
during that time and became a U.S. citizen at the same time he did. His children were 
born here. He has successfully worked for U.S. companies for the past 12 years. When 
 
 
 
 
10
his mother moves to the United States, he will not travel to Jordan. His in-laws spend 
time in Canada and are applying for Canadian citizenship. He willingly renounced his 
Jordanian citizenship and credibly asserted his allegiance to the United States. His 
Jordanian passport was destroyed and he does not intend to renew it. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record. 
 
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability 
and trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines for foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:            For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position.  Eligibility for access to ADPI/II/III is granted. 
                                    
 
             _________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
