 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
   ) 
                          )  ISCR Case No. 10-02011 
                                                                      )                                                                       
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under the personal conduct adjudicative guideline. His eligibility for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86) on 
April 23, 2004. He completed a second SF-86 on April 12, 2009. On September 17, 
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 7, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
2010. On January 6, 2011, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling Applicant’s 
hearing for January 24, 2010. On that date, I convened a hearing to consider whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced three exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 3 and admitted to the record without objection.1 The Government 
also offered two documents for administrative notice. The first document consisted of a 
blank Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86), with written instructions for 
completing the SF-86 form. I marked this document as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
Specifically, the Government requested that I take administrative notice of the language 
and instructions found in Section 24 on the SF-86 form identified as HE 1. The heading 
for Section 24 reads: “YOUR USE OF ILLEGAL DRUGS AND DRUG ACTIVITY.” 
Applicant objected to administrative notice of HE 1 because he did not complete a 
paper SF-86 form when he submitted his security clearance application in 2004. 
Instead, he completed an electronic version of the SF-86. The Government 
acknowledged that it did not have a copy of the electronic SF-86 that Applicant 
completed in 2004. However, the Government argued that the language of and 
information sought in the paper version of Section 24 was essentially the same as the 
language of and information sought in the electronic version of Section 24. 
Acknowledging and recognizing the differences in the two formats, I nevertheless 
admitted HE 1 for administrative notice. 
 
 The Government’s second document offered for administrative notice was a 
print-out of the instructions and format used for completing an electronic version of the 
SF-86 which Applicant completed in 2009. I marked this document as HE 2. Applicant 
did not object to administrative notice of HE 2, and I admitted HE 2 to the record.    
 
 Applicant testified and called one witness. He introduced one exhibit, which was 
marked as Ex. A and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing on February 1, 2011.     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied the three allegations.  (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 
1 Government Ex. 2 included a letter of denial of access to classified information, provided by Applicant in 
response to DOHA interrogatories, from an adjudicator in another government agency. The letter recites 
the answer Applicant provided in response to a question about illegal drug use on the SF-86 he 
completed in April 2004. The letter also summarized Applicant’s discussion of his illegal drug use with an 
authorized investigator from the other government agency in May 2004. Applicant denied the facts recited 
by the adjudicator about the extent and duration of his illegal drug use. I considered the adjudicator’s 
letter to be an official record compiled in the regular course of business.  See Directive, Enclosure 3, 
Additional Procedural Guidance, E3.1.20.   
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges that Applicant deliberately withheld relevant and material 
information regarding past illegal drug use on an SF-86 that he completed in April 2004 
and which was used by another government agency to process his request for access 
to classified information. SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges that Applicant deliberately withheld relevant 
and material information regarding his past illegal drug use during an interview 
conducted in about May 2004 with another government agency investigator. SOR ¶ 1.c. 
alleges that Applicant’s request for access to classified information was denied by 
another government agency in about December 2004 as a result of his involvement with 
illegal drugs and his withholding of relevant and material information regarding past 
illegal drug use during his security clearance process, as set forth in the allegations at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. (SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old, never married, and employed by a government 
contractor as a lead subcontracts representative. In September 1998, he matriculated at 
a university, where he lived and studied for approximately five years. In June 2003, he 
earned a bachelor’s degree. He has worked for his present employer since February 
2009. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Applicant began to use marijuana in September 1998, when he was a freshman 
in college. He continued to use marijuana throughout his college career when 
socializing with his friends. When he used marijuana with his friends, he was the 
purchaser of the drug about 30% of the time. In March or April 2003, while in Jamaica 
on spring break, Applicant smoked marijuana several times with his friends. He also 
purchased and ate a brownie containing marijuana or some other drug which caused 
him to hallucinate and lose control of his body. He found the experience frightening, and 
when he recovered, resolved not to use drugs again. His last use of marijuana was in 
March or April 2003. (Ex. 1 at 12-13; Ex. 2 at 4; Ex. 3 at 1-2; Tr. 49-52.) 
 
 Approximately one year later, in April 2004, Applicant completed an SF-86 and 
requested access to classified information. He completed the SF-86 on a computer at 
his employer’s place of business. He consulted with his security officer, who told him 
that the agency did not want applicants for a security clearance to be involved with 
illegal drugs for two years before applying for a security clearance. (Tr. 51-55, 61-65.) 
 
 A question on the SF-86 asked about illegal drug use. Applicant admitted illegal 
drug use. In response to a question on the form requesting specific information about 
his drug use, Applicant stated that he used marijuana one time, in September 1998. In 
May 2004, in an interview with an authorized investigator from the other government 
agency, Applicant stated that he used marijuana on September 22, 1998. He further 
stated that he did not enjoy the marijuana and never used it again. When he was 
interviewed again by an authorized investigator from the other government agency in 
August 2004, Applicant stated that he used marijuana once per month between 
September 1998 and December 1999 and ate a brownie spiked with marijuana in March 
2003. Later in the discussion with the authorized investigator, Applicant admitted 
additional marijuana use while on a bus in Jamaica in 2003. He told the investigator that 
he had not provided the full extent of his involvement with marijuana during his previous 
 
4 
 
 
security processing because he feared that if he told the truth about his illegal 
involvement with drugs, he might not be hired by his employer. He stated that he could 
not remember the exact dates of his additional drug use. He admitted that he intended 
to mislead the Government about his involvement with illegal drugs. By letter dated 
December 3, 2004, the other government agency denied Applicant’s request for access 
to classified information. (H.E. 2; Ex. 2, 1-4.)  
 
   Applicant completed a second SF-86 in April 2009. In response to a question   
on the SF-86 which asked about his illegal drug use, Applicant stated that he used 
marijuana from September 1998 to April 2003. He estimated that he used marijuana 
“about 1 time every 4-5 months during my five years in school. Socially smoked at 
college parties every now and then.” (Ex. 1 at 11.) 
 
 In response to another question on the SF-86, Applicant admitted that he had 
previously been investigated for a security clearance and had been denied a clearance 
in December 2004. He then provided the following additional information: 
 
Investigator did not believe my disclosure of information concerning 
history involving illegal drug use. I disclosed that I had smoked marijuana 
occasionally in school, but did not have exact dates, and the investigator 
felt that my intent was to mislead the Government, which was completely 
ridiculous in my opinion. At any rate, the investigator’s opinion was that I 
was trying to hide information, which wouldn’t make any sense if I 
admitted to the use in the first place. Lastly, I intended to appeal the 
decision based on the above logic and the fact that I did not lie or intend to 
mislead anyone, but was advised to take no action by security officer at 
[place of employment] at that time.      
 
(Ex. 1 at 11-12.) 
 
 Applicant denied he intended to mislead the Government when he did not list his 
illegal drug use after September 1998. He stated: “Never, I never intended to withhold 
any information, or I could just not have admitted it. I could have avoided the entire thing 
and said I’ve never [used illegal drugs] in my life. You know, I think that’s my . . . point.” 
(Tr. 67.)   
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor appeared on his behalf. He stated that Applicant 
was very competent and performs his work well. (Tr. 75.) 
 
 Applicant provided a letter of character reference from his facility security officer. 
The facility security officer recommended Applicant for a security clearance. He stated 
that Applicant is very professional, possesses strong moral character, and is 
dependable. (Ex. A.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
Analysis 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 In 2004, one year after experiencing a frightening reaction to an illegal drug, 
Applicant completed a security clearance application. He knew he had used marijuana 
from 1998 to 2003. He also knew from his security officer that the agency granting the 
security clearance would not look favorably on illegal drug use less than two years 
before the security clearance application was filed. 
 
 In responding to a question on an SF-86 to report any illegal drug use and the 
extent of that illegal use, Applicant elected to report only one incident of illegal drug use 
in 1998. He withheld information about his illegal drug use in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 
and 2003. In defending this deliberate omission at his security clearance hearing, 
Applicant argued that concealing this information was better than denying any illegal 
drug use at all. Applicant’s argument lacked credibility. 
 
 Applicant also provided false and misleading information about his illegal drug 
use to an authorized investigator during his security investigation in May 2004. When 
first interviewed, he told the investigator that he used marijuana only once, on 
September 22, 1998, and never used the drug again. When he was interviewed again 
by an authorized investigator from the other government agency in August 2004, 
Applicant stated that he used marijuana once per month between September 1998 and 
December 1999 and ate a brownie spiked with marijuana in March 2003. Later in the 
discussion with the authorized investigator, Applicant admitted additional marijuana use 
while on a bus in Jamaica in 2003. He told the investigator that he had not provided the 
full extent of his involvement with marijuana during his previous security processing 
 
7 
 
 
because he feared that if he told the truth about his illegal involvement with drugs, he 
might not be hired by his employer. Applicant’s failure to be truthful about his marijuana 
use resulted in the denial of his application for a security clearance by another 
Government agency. 
 
 The denial of Applicant’s application for a security clearance was not per se 
disqualifying conduct by Applicant. Accordingly, I conclude SOR allegation 1.c. for 
Applicant. 
 
 However, Applicant’s personal conduct as alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. 
raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(e). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(e) reads, in 
pertinent part: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging 
in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional or 
community standing . . .  .” 
  
 AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b) and 17(e) provide conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns in this case. AG ¶ 17(a) reads: “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts 
to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts.” AG ¶ 17(b) reads: 
 
the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) reads: “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant’s concealment of information was 
caused by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel 
instructing him concerning the security clearance process. Applicant’s defense of his 
deceptive conduct at his hearing indicates he has not taken positive steps to reduce his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant did not make prompt good-faith efforts to correct his concealment of 
relevant and material facts about his illegal drug use. Instead, he continued to conceal 
his illegal drug use during his security investigation, only revealing specific facts after 
continued questioning by the authorized investigator. Moreover, Applicant was not 
candid and forthright about these matters during his security clearance hearing, thereby 
perpetuating the falsification and raising concerns about his trustworthiness, reliability, 
and judgment. I conclude that neither AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), nor 17(e) applies to the facts 
of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 Applicant is a mature and well-educated individual. He was denied program 
access eligibility by another government agency because he had provided inaccurate 
and untruthful information about his past illegal drug use. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant provided a letter, dated December 3, 2004, from the other 
Government Agency in which it denied him access eligibility based upon the conduct 
specified in SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b. The letter corroborated the Government’s 
allegations. Applicant denied he deliberately intended to mislead the Government by 
withholding relevant and material information regarding his past illegal drug use from his 
April 2004 SF-86 and from his security interview in May 2004. I reviewed the written 
record in this case thoroughly. I also observed Applicant at his security clearance 
hearing, and I listened carefully to his testimony. I conclude that his denials that he 
deliberately withheld relevant and material information from his security clearance 
application and in interviews with authorized investigators were not credible.    
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b..: Against Applicant 
 
            Subparagraph 1.c.:                       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
