                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00380 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use started in 2007 and continued until about 
November 2009. He intentionally understated his marijuana use on his April 29, 2009 
security clearance application. Personal conduct and drug involvement concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86) 
(Item 5). On July 21, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and 
E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On September 10, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
his right to a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated September 28, 2010, was provided to him on December 21, 2010. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on February 8, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.c and 2.a.3 He acknowledged that he used marijuana approximately 20 times from 
2007 to at least November 2009, and that he purchased “$10.00 baggies” of marijuana 
approximately 20 times from a friend. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) He admitted that as of 
December 2009, he planned to continue to use marijuana in the future. (SOR ¶ 1.c) He 
also admitted that on his April 29, 2009 SF 86, he indicated his marijuana use was 
“once” from August 2007 to September 2007, and that he “deliberately failed to 
disclose” the more extensive marijuana use described previously in this paragraph. 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) 
 
Applicant is a 22-year-old employee of a defense contractor.4 He graduated from 
high school in 2006. From October 2007 to present, he worked in the mailroom and 
performed maintenance services. He has never served in the military. He has never 
married and does not have any children.  
 
Drug involvement5 
 
 On December 8, 2009, Applicant provided a written, sworn statement, describing 
his history of marijuana use. Since 2007, he has used marijuana approximately 20 times 
with friends and family members on weekends. He purchased marijuana about 20 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated September 29, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
December 21, 2010. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Applicant’s SOR response is the basis for the facts in this paragraph. (Item 4) 
 
4Applicant’s April 29, 2009 SF 86 is the basis for the facts in this paragraph. (Item 5) 
 
5Applicant’s December 8, 2009 statement is the basis for the facts in this section. (Item 6) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
times. He purchased $10 baggies from a friend.  He denied that he was dependent on 
marijuana. He has not had any drug-related counseling and does not believe he needs 
any counseling. He uses marijuana to relax even though he knows marijuana 
possession is illegal. His most recent marijuana use was in November 2009.  
 
As of December 8, 2009, Applicant “planed on using marijuana on weekends for 
recreation in the future”; however, he is willing to stop using marijuana to retain his 
employment or receive a security clearance. He declined to provide the names of 
witnesses who would be aware of his marijuana use.       
      
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct). 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the drug involvement security concern: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug[6] or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”7 
 
6AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
and “illegal drug possession or sale or distribution.” These two disqualifying conditions 
apply because Applicant used and possessed marijuana. He fully disclosed his drug 
abuse in a sworn statement on December 8, 2009. He possessed marijuana on 
approximately 20 occasions before he used it. He did not describe any marijuana use 
after November 2009.   
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”8 
 
8ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use lasted about two years. He continued using 
marijuana after completing his April 29, 2009 SF 86. In his December 8, 2009 sworn 
statement he said he planned to continue to use marijuana; however, he is willing to 
stop using marijuana to hold a security clearance. It is unclear whether he used 
marijuana after making his December 8, 2009 sworn statement. There is insufficient 
evidence to support a conclusion that he will not use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 
26(a) does not apply to his marijuana-related offenses.9    
 
Applicant has not demonstrated his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. 
He has not disassociated from his drug-using associates and contacts. He has not 
provided sufficient evidence that he has broken his patterns of drug abuse and  
changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has not provided “a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) 
does not apply.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. Marijuana was never prescribed for him. He has not received a 
prognosis of low probability of recurrence of drug abuse.   
  
In conclusion, there is no evidence whether Applicant continued to use marijuana 
after November 2009. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He 
 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
9In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
understands the adverse results from marijuana use.10 He has not shown or 
demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as 
a bar to his access to classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents11 used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information on his April 29, 2009 SF 86 
when he understated his marijuana use. When he completed his SF 86, he stated in the 
 
10Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
11The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
comments section that he used marijuana once in 2007. He did not disclose his 
marijuana use on approximately 20 occasions continuing into 2009. (SOR ¶ 2.a) AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and 16(b) apply and further inquiry about the possible application of mitigating 
conditions is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole-person analysis for candidly 
admitting he deliberately falsified the April 29, 2009 SF 86. However, the personal 
conduct concerns pertaining to Applicant’s falsification of his 2009 SF 86 about the 
duration and extent of his marijuana use cannot be mitigated at this time because it is 
too serious and too recent. His failure to be fully candid and forthright on his 2009 SF 86 
shows poor judgment and militates against approval of a security clearance. More 
progress is necessary to assure Applicant has the reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment necessary to safeguard classified information. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he began using marijuana. He served his 
country as an employee of a Government contractor. In his December 8, 2009 sworn 
statement, and in his September 10, 2010 SOR response, he candidly admitted his 
extensive history of marijuana use. He did not receive any drug counseling or therapy. 
He knows the consequences of marijuana use. He contributes to his company and the 
Department of Defense. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally 
violate national security. His supervisors evidently support him, or he would not have 
been able to retain his employment after his security clearance was called into question.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. On 
December 8, 2009, he disclosed his extensive marijuana use; however, on April 29, 
2009, he deliberately understated his marijuana use on his SF 86. He was sufficiently 
mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. His marijuana use after completing his SF 
86 and his failure to be candid about his marijuana abuse on his SF 86 show a lack of 
judgment and a failure to abide by the law. Such lapses in judgment are especially 
relevant because they were made in the context of security requirements. His 
falsification of his 2009 SF 86s raises a particularly serious security concern.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude drug involvement and 
personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is 
not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
