                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02818 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are partially the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. However, his evidence did not show he has been financial responsible, or that 
he understands what is expected of him to be eligible for a security clearance. He 
presented little or no evidence about his current financial situation, a working budget, or 
a viable plan to resolve the remainder of his debts and avoid similar financial problems 
in the future. Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 10, 
2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators 
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
On September 2, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant’s undated Answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on September 
30, 2010. He elected to have his case decided without a hearing. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated October 27, 2010, was provided to him. 
Applicant received his copy of the FORM on November 1, 2010, and he timely 
submitted his response to the FORM (undated and not signed), which included 
numerous documents addressing the SOR allegations. The case was assigned to me 
on December 10, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f through 1.k, 
with explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.e. His admissions are incorporated 
here as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old carpenter working for a government contractor. He 
graduated from high school in June 1981. He married his wife in December 1985, and 
they have four children, ages 29, 24, 22, and 19. Applicant worked as a machine 
operator for a private company from 1992 until 2005. He has worked for two 
government contractors since March 2005. This is his first security clearance 
application. 
 
In his November 2009 SCA, Applicant disclosed he had financial problems. In 
2006, he defaulted on a $130,000 mortgage, and the property was foreclosed and later 
sold in auction. His background investigation revealed the 11 delinquent or charged-off 
debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a state tax lien filed against Applicant in 1992. He resolved the 
tax debt around 1995, and the lien was erroneously filed against him. He contested the 
lien and it was removed from his credit report. (FORM Response) 
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the guidelines implemented by the DoD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $137 debt in collection. Applicant did not receive collection 
notices after he moved in 2006 and he forgot about the debt. He made the last payment 
on the debt in December 2010. (SOR Answer, FORM Response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $1,106 delinquent debt for medical services provided to his 
son because of a traffic accident. Applicant retained an attorney to handle his son’s tort 
claim, which is pending. He intends to pay the debt after the lawsuit is settled.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $195 delinquent debt for medical services. Applicant did not 
recognize the debt and disputed it in writing through the credit bureau. The status of the 
dispute is unknown. (FORM Response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $129 delinquent debt for medical services. Applicant paid 
this debt in 2004. He had it removed from his most recent credit report. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges an approximately $25,000 delinquent second mortgage. SOR 
¶ 1.g alleges an approximately $8,500 delinquent second mortgage that was charged 
off. SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $109,000 delinquent real estate mortgage in foreclosure. All 
the mortgages appear to relate to the same home, which was foreclosed and sold in 
auction in 2006. Applicant believes he no longer has any financial responsibility for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h because he assumes the debts were covered by 
the proceeds of the sale of the property. He presented no documentary evidence to 
support his claim. Based on the record credit reports, I find the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.f and 1.g allege the same debt. I find SOR ¶ 1.f for Applicant. SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are 
unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a $555 debt in collection. Applicant paid the debt in September 
2010. (FORM Response)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a $192 medical debt in collection. Applicant incurred the debt 
as a result of a work-related accident. He claimed his insurance company was 
supposed to pay the debt. He presented no documentary evidence of payment. 
Applicant’s November 2010 shows the debt is unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a $535 debt in collection. Applicant paid the debt, but it was 
not removed from his credit report. He then disputed the debt and it was removed from 
his credit report. (Item 4) 
 
During a January 2010 interview, Applicant explained that his financial problems 
started in the 1980s when he was self-employed building homes. A customer refused to 
pay for a home he built at about the same time his son was born with medical problems. 
Applicant spent most of his time at the hospital, neglected his business, and accrued 
medical expenses. Other debts became delinquent because he could not afford to pay 
them. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection around 1989. Additionally, around 
1995, Applicant and his wife separated and she filed for divorce. His financial problems 
were aggravated because he had to financially support two households.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant accrued $10,000 in unpaid state taxes related to his home construction 
business. He refinanced his home and took a second mortgage to pay his tax debt. In 
early 2005, Applicant refinanced his home again with an adjustable rate mortgage. 
When the mortgage rate increased, he was not able to make the payments and the 
home was foreclosed and sold in auction in 2006.  
 
During his interview, Applicant told the investigator that his financial situation had 
improved since he started working for a government contractor in 2005. He is now fully 
employed and making a good salary. Apparently, he and his wife are back together, and 
they have three grandchildren. Applicant presented no other evidence about his current 
financial situation. The record contains little or no information about his monthly income, 
living expenses, and outstanding debts. Nor is there evidence of financial counseling, 
that he follows a budget, or an established viable plan to resolve the reminder of his 
debts. In his response to the FORM, Applicant included a November 2010 credit report. 
It shows most of Applicant’s financial obligations have been either delinquent or in 
collection.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
 
5 
 
 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996); and ISCR Case 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems dating from the 1980s, when he filed 
for bankruptcy protection, and they are still ongoing. The SOR alleged 11 delinquent 
debts in collection or charged off, some of which were delinquent for several years. The 
record evidence shows Applicant resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.k. He also 
disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.d, but it has not been resolved. SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, and I.j are 
unresolved. I find SOR ¶ 1.f a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.g, thus I find for him on this 
allegation.  
 
6 
 
 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts raise the applicability of AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance application. 
He has been consistently employed by two different government contractors since 
2005. Out of the 11 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant resolved five debts, 
he is in the process of disputing another, and one allegation is duplicated. He has four 
delinquent debts that are unresolved. The main concern is for SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h, for 
which he claimed he no longer has any financial responsibility because the property 
was foreclosed and sold at auction. He presented no documentary evidence to show he 
is no longer responsible for these debts.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
some of the SOR debts are unresolved (recent behavior). It partially applies because he 
resolved five of the delinquent debts, and he disputed another debt.  
 
The evidence established circumstances beyond his control contributing to his 
inability to pay his debts, i.e., his construction business failure, his son’s medical 
 
7 
 
 
problems, and his period of separation from his wife. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established 
by the evidence. It does not fully apply, because Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to 
demonstrate he exercised financial responsibility in the acquisition of his debts and 
good-faith efforts to contact creditors and to resolve his debts after they became 
delinquent.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply since there is no evidence Applicant participated in 
financial counseling. He demonstrated some desire to resolve his debts by paying some 
and disputing others after receipt of his SOR. His actions establish partial mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d). He receives only partial credit because he should have been more 
diligent and aggressive in the resolution of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) applies because he 
successfully disputed one debt and is in the process of disputing another.  
 
 Applicant presented little or no evidence about his current financial situation, 
including his current monthly income, living expenses, and outstanding debts. There is 
no evidence that he follows a budget or that he has a viable plan to pay the remainder 
of his debts or to prevent similar financial problems in the future. Considering the record 
as a whole, Applicant’s sparse favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate the 
financial considerations concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(c) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
Applicant is a good father and a good worker. He has successfully worked for 
two government contractors for approximately seven years. This is his first security 
clearance application. He disclosed his financial problems in his security clearance 
application. His delinquent debts were partially the result of circumstances beyond his 
 
8 
 
 
control. Notwithstanding, he does not fully understand what it is required of him to show 
financial responsibility and what is expected of him to be eligible for a security 
clearance. Considering the sparse favorable information available, Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. The record 
evidence failed to establish Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d,   For Applicant 
    1.e, 1.f, 1.i, and 1.k: 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.g,    Against Applicant 
   1.h, and I.j: 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
