                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-00911 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 27, 2009, Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86)(e-QIP). On March 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 16, 2010. She answered 
the SOR in writing on March 16, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on March 22, 2010. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 3, 2010, and I received the case 
assignment on August 31, 2010. The case was originally assigned to another 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge on August 10, 2010, but reassigned to me because of caseload 
considerations.  
 
 DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on October 5, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 
4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits A through Q, without objection. Exhibit R was marked but not 
admitted after Department Counsel’s objection was upheld. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 13, 2010. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the country of Liberia. (Tr. 44, 45) The request and the 
attached documents were admitted into evidence and included in the record as Exhibit 
4. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
the SOR. She provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a 
security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and was born in the United States in 1983. 
She is a U.S. citizen. Applicant works for an accounting and consulting contractor for 
the U.S. government as an auditor and accountant. She was educated in the United 
States. She rents her own apartment in the United States. She does not have any 
financial or property interests outside the United States. Her parents were born in 
Liberia, a nation on the western coast of Africa. They immigrated to the United States 
before 1983 to continue their academic studies. Applicant has an older sister, who was 
born in Liberia, and two younger brothers, who were born in Liberia after Applicant and 
her parents returned there in late 1983. Applicant remained in Liberia with her family 
until they all returned to the United States in 1990. Applicant has not traveled to Liberia 
after 1990. (Tr. 66, 72, 75, 85, 86; Exhibits 1, 3, A-I) 
 
 Applicant’s parents became U.S. citizens in 2008. Her two brothers also obtained 
U.S. citizenship. They live and work in the United States. Her sister is not a U.S. citizen, 
but is a registered alien living and working in the United States. Applicant’s father 
worked in the U.S. until he returned to Liberia in 2009. He is unemployed at the present 
time after working as a security guard in the United States. She speaks with him about 
once every two or three months. Her mother returned to Liberia in June 2008. Applicant 
speaks with her about every two or three weeks. After her mother returned to Liberia, 
 
3 
 
 
she worked in the government Ministry of Finance in the budget and accounting division 
until August 2009. Then she worked for the Liberian National Port Authority (NPA) as 
the Comptroller. Applicant does not know if the National Port Authority is part of the 
Liberian government. Her mother is a certified public accountant. Part of her duties 
include preparing the NPA tax returns, conferring with the managing director and board 
of directors, supervising investments and raising funds for the business, and “projects 
future company growth.” Applicant’s interrogatory answer was that her mother did not 
presently work for the Liberian government in her current position at the NPA. Her 
parents divorced in 2010. (Tr. 71, 75, 78, 79, 80, 82, 86, 87, 93; Exhibits 1-3, A) 
 
 Applicant had a Liberian passport until it expired in 1996, according to her 
interrogatory answer. Her parents obtained that passport for her when she was a child 
and traveled with them back to Liberia. Since 2001, Applicant has only had a U.S. 
passport. Applicant had dual citizenship with Liberia because of her parents’ Liberian 
citizenship. She renounced her Liberian citizenship during the government investigator’s 
interview in 2009. She also destroyed her expired Liberian passport at the same time. 
(Tr. 72; Exhibits 1-3, A, B) 
 
 Applicant submitted seven character statements from her co-workers, 
supervisors, and company officials. All writers regard Applicant as honest, trustworthy, a 
hard-working employee who delivers a quality work product on time. Her facility security 
officer also testified on Applicant’s behalf. His testimony and written statement show he 
has known Applicant for five years and is impressed with her productivity. Applicant’s 
aunt also testified favorably on her behalf. (Tr. 48-60; Exhibits B-H) 
 
 Applicant submitted her 2007 through 2010 employee evaluation reports. Her 
overall rating on each evaluation is “exceeds expectations.” (Exhibit I) 
 
 Many of Applicant’s relatives live in the United States. She has never been 
approached by anyone seeking information about her duties. Applicant testified she 
would contact the appropriate investigative authority, including the Federal Bureau of 
Investigations (FBI) if she were approached and questioned by anyone about her work 
and any classified information to which she had access. (Tr. 84, 97, 101) 
 
 Applicant made a well-organized and credible presentation about her family 
members and her personal history in the United States. She answered questions 
forthrightly and frankly. Applicant displayed a lack of knowledge about Liberian political 
institutions and history. She has no friends in Liberia. (Tr. 79, 84, 93-96, 100) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts about Liberia. This country is 
located on the western coast of Africa. It was founded in 1840 by freed slaves from the 
United States under the auspices of the American Colonization Society. In 1846 it 
became an independent country. Since then it has had a republican constitution 
modeled from the U.S. Constitution. Liberia has an elected president, vice-president, 
and bicameral legislature. From its founding until 1980 it was dominated politically by 
one party, the True Whig Party, controlled by the descendents of the freed slaves, who 
 
4 
 
 
first established the country, the Americo-Liberian elite (about 5% of the population). In 
1980 a coup d’état by an army master sergeant Samuel K. Doe took over Liberia under 
a revolutionary group named the People’s Redemption Council. He executed the 
elected president William R. Tolbert and other officials. Mr. Doe started promoting 
members of his tribe, the Krahn ethnic group, causing internal tensions amongst the 
other ethnic groups in Liberia.  
 
In 1989 Charles Taylor started an insurrection against the Doe government. More 
than 200,000 people were killed during this civil war. In 2005 free and fair elections for 
president, vice-president, and the national legislature were held. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
was elected president. She formed a government of technocrats intending to restore 
peace and prosperity to Liberia. The political situation has been stable since then in the 
country.  
 
Liberia was an iron ore exporter for many years. It also exported rubber. It has 
over 3,000 ocean-going vessels registered under its maritime laws and flying its national 
flag.  
 
Liberia has had a pro-Western and pro-United States foreign policy for many 
years. It has been a member of many international organizations, in addition to being a 
founding member of the United Nations in 1946.  
 
Liberia has had some human rights issues over the past 30 years to a great 
extent because of the 14-year civil war. There are reports of political and economic 
disputes between Liberian citizens being handled outside the court system by beatings, 
killings, and other violent methods. Torture is unconstitutional, but periodically there are 
reports of such incidents by police and security officials. Trial by ordeal is outlawed 
officially, yet reports from some rural areas indicate it is sometimes used. There are no 
reports of political prisoners being detained. The courts are open and functioning, but 
are not efficient or incorruptible. The Liberian Constitution contains many of the 
freedoms listed in the U.S. Bill of Rights, but adherence to them may be strained in 
certain parts of the country.  
 
Liberia has 15 counties. The government is centralized in the capitol of Monrovia, 
named for U.S. President James Monroe, who was in office when the country was 
founded. Monrovia has over one million residents. Liberia is about the size of the State 
of Ohio in the United States. It is one of the poorest countries in the world and has a 
population of 3.49 million. There are 16 ethnic groups in the country and as many 
languages. English is the official language. The 2009 GDP was $836 million.  
 
The crime rate is high in Liberia. Unemployment is also large. Theft, assault, 
sexual crimes, and murder are problems, along with financial scams and fraud. 
Hospitals in Liberia are poorly equipped. Medicines are scarce. Yellow fever, typhoid, 
and malaria are problem diseases throughout the country.  
 
 
5 
 
 
In summary, Liberia does not have medical facilities and medications as the 
United States does. It is a poor country with high unemployment and low per capita 
income levels. Travel is risky and Americans should be constantly guarding against 
physical threats and illness. There is no evidence in the materials that Liberia is a 
collector of classified or proprietary economic or military information from the United 
States. (Exhibits 4, J-Q)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two guidelines are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father live in Liberia. They have dual citizenship with the 
United States and Liberia, where they were born. Applicant contacts her mother twice a 
month and her father every two or three months. This situation creates a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Three conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided under 
AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Liberia is not a country that threatens the United States from a security or 
economic position. Therefore, the second clause of AG ¶ 8(a) applies to Applicant’s 
situation, that is, “the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or 
activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Her parents live and 
work in Liberia. It is unlikely that her mother’s position with the private NPA or her 
father’s presence in Liberia while unemployed are such that Applicant will be placed in 
any compromising position and forced to choose between them and the interests of the 
United States.  
 
 Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on her relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., her birth country and residence for the past 20 years, she 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. Her 
employment and assets are in the United States. She has not traveled to Liberia after 
she returned to United States with her family in 1990 during the Liberian civil war. She 
exhibited in her testimony at the hearing a significant lack of knowledge about Liberia or 
interest in it. Her concerns are her job in the United States, her professional 
development as an auditor and accountant, and living in the United States for the 
remainder of her life.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) has limited application to Applicant’s relationships with her parents, 
with whom she has varying degrees of communication in Liberia. It is highly unlikely that 
the three or four times per year she has contact with her father will create a risk for 
Liberian influence or exploitation. Her monthly telephone calls to her mother, a 
technocrat in a professional position, are also not of the type to create a risk for Liberian 
influence or exploitation. Applicant’s employment does not create any such risk because 
its professional accounting and auditing functions do not lend themselves to useful 
Liberian influence or exploitation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and 
professional individual highly regarded by her company managers. She is an 
accountant and auditor whose only connection to Liberia is that her parents and siblings 
were born there, but Applicant was born in the United States. The only time she was in 
Liberia was from 1983 to 1990 when her family returned to the United States during the 
Liberian civil war. Applicant does not exhibit any knowledge of Liberian government 
institutions or politics. She was educated in the United States and has no financial or 
property interests outside the United States. Applicant made an articulate and well-
organized presentation demonstrating her strong connections to and preference for the 
United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence 
situation. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
