                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-01996 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns for Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 13, 2009. On August 2, 1010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated September 30, 2010, was provided to him by cover letter dated 
October 1, 2010. Applicant received his copy of the FORM on October 11, 2010. He 
was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to submit any objections, and 
information in mitigation or extenuation. He did submit additional information within the 
30-day period. The case was assigned to me on December 15, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1a to 1d and 1g. He denied the remaining allegations. He explained in his response to 
SOR that the debt in SOR ¶ 1e was a duplicate of the debt in 1g and the debt in SOR ¶ 
1a was also a duplicate of the debt in 1f. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old senior systems field engineer, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since October 2009.1 He graduated from high school in June 
1995. His e-QIP does not reflect military service or that he pursued higher education. 
Applicant has never married and has no dependents. 
  
Applicant’s SOR lists eight debts, totalling approximately $139,947. (Items 5 – 8.) 
Applicant indicated in his SOR answer that debts in SOR ¶¶ 1a and 1h, as well as 1e 
and 1g, respectively, are duplicates. He corroborated this assertion with documentation 
attached to his SOR answer. If the two duplicate debts are excluded, that still leaves 
Applicant owing six debts totalling approximately $128,096. Applicant denied one other 
debt, the foreclosure deficiency balance for his mortgage of $92,500. (SOR ¶ 1f.) 
Applicant claims that he does not owe this debt because he, “never received a letter or 
anything referring to me owing anything for this property, as I’m sure it was sold for a 
profit.” He further states that his original loan was for $92,500 and that he had paid that 
amount down to $70,000 at the time of his foreclosure in 2006. (Item 4.) Applicant 
submitted an August 2010 credit report indicating that, “Credit Grantor reclaimed 
collateral to settle defaulted mortgage.” His credit report reflects this account is closed 
and does not reflect any amount past due. (Item 4, p. 16.) The remaining debts are 
established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. (Items 4 – 8.) 
1 Background information is derived from Applicant’s e-QIP unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant worked in the automobile industry and was “doing great” until 2006. He 
was a home owner at age 20, had a new automobile and a new motorcycle, and was 
current on his bills. In mid-2005, his hours and corresponding income were reduced 
significantly and, after six months of less income, he began augmenting his income with 
credit cards. (Item 4.) 
 
 Recognizing the automobile industry was declining, he relocated to another part 
of the country in mid-2006 where he held a series of jobs until he secured his present 
position. (Item 4.) He claims that he has about $10,000 saved to pay his debts once his 
current job is “permanent.” (Items 6, 7.) His monthly budget submitted in March 2010 
reflects a net remainder of $2,267.88. (Item 7.) He stated most recently in his March 
2010 response to interrogatories that he is not paying his creditors because he does not 
have a secure job. He explained: 
 
Nothing has been secure and with that I have not begun to negotiate with 
my creditors. The reason being I have done my research and once I agree 
to a payment plan with a creditor and I happen to fail on following through 
with the agreement then the statute of limitations can begin from the date 
of the new agreement. If I didn’t get this job I would not be able to follow 
through with that agreement and it would then allow the creditor keep it on 
my credit report for another 7 years. (Item 7.) 
 
Applicant has the ability and means to pay his creditors, in whole or in part, but 
has taken the position that he will not do so until he has a “secure” job. His ability to 
obtain a “secure” job appears to be contingent on whether he is granted a security 
clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
 
4 
 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Conclusions 
 
  Under Guideline F, the Government’s concern is that an Applicant’s failure or 
inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Since 2006, Applicant accumulated eight debts totaling $139,947, which were 
alleged in the SOR. Upon further review and based on evidence submitted by the 
Applicant, two of those debts appear to be duplicates and his foreclosure deficiency 
appears to be resolved. The remaining debts remain delinquent. His history of 
indebtedness is well documented. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e) 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because the 
underemployment that he experienced following the downturn of the automobile 
industry was largely beyond his control. However, to receive full credit under this 
mitigating condition, Applicant has to demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
circumstances. There is no evidence in the record that Applicant remained in contact 
with his creditors or tried to make minimum payments during this time.2  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial counseling. 
Likewise, there is not sufficient evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).3 Despite having $10,000 set aside and a net monthly surplus of $2,267, 
Applicant has opted not to pay or attempt to pay his remaining valid debts because he is 
waiting to see if his job is secure. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to two of his debts because 
Applicant has established that they are duplicates. Additionally, the arrearage amount 
owed on the foreclosure of his mortgage appears to have been resolved in the 
foreclosure process. 
  
 I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines. I applied the 
whole-person concept. I specifically considered Applicant’s age, education, his valued 
service as a defense contractor employee, and other limited evidence contained in the 
record. Unfortunately, Applicant has the “horse before the cart” in his approach to 
obtaining a security clearance. As indicated, he must demonstrate financial 
responsibility before being granted a clearance. I believe he is capable of reaching his 
goal, however, as things stand now, I am unable to grant him a security clearance.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines.  
 
2 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
3 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1a - 1d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1e. - 1f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1h:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
