KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s criminal conduct reflect a
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-17691.a1
DATE: 07/19/2007
DATE: July 19, 2007
In Re:
------
SSN: -----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17691
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 17, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 29, 2006, after the hearing,
2
Administrative Judge James A. Young denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his findings;
whether the Judge erred in concluding Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance application
was deliberate; whether the Judge erred by concluding that the security concerns raised under
Guidelines E and J had not been mitigated.
(1) Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in findings that Applicant’s criminal offenses were
committed at his girl friend’s house, when in fact the lease for the house was in his name as well as
his girl friend’s name.  However, even if the challenged finding was changed to reflect Applicant’s
interpretation of the record evidence, it would not have undermined the Judge’s conclusions.
Therefore, any such error would be at most harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 05-08459 at 2, n.1 (App.
Bd. Nov. 16, 2006).  Applicant also asserts that the Judge erred in finding Applicant had committed
two of the criminal offences alleged in the SOR because the charges for both were eventually
dismissed.  In this regard, Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s
material findings with respect to Applicant’s conduct of security concern do not reflect a reasonable
or plausible interpretation of the record evidence.  
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  A Judge can find an applicant has engaged in criminal conduct even if the criminal charges
against the applicant were dropped or dismissed.  See ISCR Case No. 03-11906 at 3 (App. Bd. July
19, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-21761 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 28, 2005).  Considering the record as a
whole, the Judge’s material findings with respect to Applicant’s criminal conduct reflect a reasonable
interpretation of the record evidence and are supported by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 03-21933 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2006).
(2) Applicant also contends that he did not deliberately falsify his security clearance
application by failing to disclose that he had been arrested on five criminal charges in 2002 and one
criminal charge 2003.  In support of this contention, he argues that the omission of the information
was due to a misreading the question, and he subsequently provided the correct information.
Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why he failed to
disclose the information in question.  The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or reject
Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omission was
deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s findings of deliberate falsification are
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1; ISCR Case No. 04-03849 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006).
The security concerns raised by Applicant’s falsification were not necessarily overcome by
Applicant’s subsequent disclosures to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 01-19513 at 5 (App. Bd.
Jan. 22, 2004).  
3
(3) Finally, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the security concerns
raised by his disqualifying conduct had not been mitigated.  With respect to the falsification of his
security clearance application, Applicant argues that the Judge should have found the disqualifying
conduct mitigated, as a matter of law, because the conduct was an isolated incident; it was not recent;
it was not likely to recur; and Applicant had subsequently provided the correct information
voluntarily.  With respect to his criminal conduct  Applicant argues the Judge should have found the
disqualifying conduct mitigated, as a matter of law, because two of the charges resulted in
dismissals; the conduct was unsubstantiated; the conduct was an isolated incident; the conduct was
not likely to recur; and Applicant was pressured to commit the conduct.  The Board does not find
these arguments persuasive.
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person
factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some
mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
recency and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions and whole person factors.  The Judge reasonably explained why the
evidence which the Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the
government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).
Given the record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guidelines E and J is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
