 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 04-11456 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on July 8, 2003. 
On October 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 23, 2007; answered it in 
an undated document; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. DOHA 
received his answer on November 5, 2007. On December 7, 2007, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge, pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.8. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 27, 2007, and the case 
was assigned to me on January 2, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 
 
2 
 
 
7, 2008, setting the case for February 28, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which 
was admitted without objection. The record closed when the hearing adjourned. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2008. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations of criminal conduct 
under Guideline J, but he denied the allegation of falsifying his SF 86 under Guideline 
E. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old apprentice draftsman employed by a federal 
contractor. If he successfully completes his apprenticeship, he will receive an 
associate’s degree in marine engineering (Tr. 7). He worked in a number of entry-level 
jobs after high school and was working as a pizza delivery driver before being hired by 
his current employer. He has worked for his current employer since July 2004 (GX 5 at 
1). He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of burglary in 1999 and placed on supervised probation 
for about two years. He was 19 or 20 years old at the time. The offenses occurred when 
Applicant, his brother, and a friend were drinking beer and were intoxicated. The friend 
decided to break into a store. Applicant and his brother remained outside the store while 
the friend broke in and stole some beer. Applicant testified he tried to stop his friend 
from breaking in (Tr. 56). The friend put the beer in his car and all three drove away (GX 
5 at 2; Tr. 53-54). Applicant was charged with a felony; but the charge was reduced to a 
misdemeanor, he was treated as a youthful offender, and the record was sealed (Tr. 49-
50). 
 
 In 2001, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) after his 
girlfriend caused a disturbance in the parking lot of a bar and the police were 
summoned. When the police arrived, Applicant was sitting in his car with the keys in the 
ignition. He had turned on the ignition switch to operate the cigarette lighter (Tr. 59). 
The case was pending for about 18 months because his lawyer contested the charge. 
Finally, Applicant agreed to plead guilty if the record would be sealed (Tr. 60).  His 
driver’s license was suspended for about 18 months and he paid a fine (Tr. 60-61; GX 5 
at 3).  
 
 In December 2001, Applicant and his girlfriend had an argument during which he 
punched her in the face and she stabbed him. His girlfriend drove him to a hospital, 
which notified the police because of the stab wound. Applicant and his girlfriend told the 
police that an intruder had entered their residence, stabbed Applicant, and hit his 
girlfriend in the face. Applicant later admitted the report was false. He was charged with 
false reporting and domestic violence. Two warrants were issued for his failure to 
 
3 
 
 
appear in court. He was arrested and pleaded guilty to filing a false report. He was 
sentenced to ten days in jail, suspended, and a fine. The domestic violence charge was 
disposed of by a nolle prosequi (GX 4 at 1-2; GX 5 at 3-4).  
 
 In April 2002, Applicant and his girlfriend moved to the New England area. In 
February 2003, they had another argument and altercation. It occurred after Applicant 
broke off their relationship when he learned his girlfriend was selling crack cocaine. His 
girlfriend accused him of punching her in the face and kicking her in the stomach. When 
the police arrived, Applicant initially used his brother’s name to identify himself, but then 
reconsidered and identified himself correctly (Tr. 68-69; GX 3 at 3, 6, 9-10). He was 
charged with domestic violence and disorderly conduct. Applicant denied striking his 
girlfriend. According to Applicant, she struck him in the head with a pipe and then 
injured and bruised herself to make herself look like a victim (GX 5 at 4; Tr. 67-71). 
Applicant enrolled in anger management classes for one and half months in an effort to 
look good for his trial. He stopped attending the classes when he decided he did not 
have an anger-management problem (GX 5 at 6). The charges were disposed of by a 
nolle prosequi (GX 3; GX 5 at 4).  
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant had long since ended his relationship with 
the girlfriend involved in the above incidents, and was married to another woman (Tr. 
52). He blamed the offenses on “bad choices in a girlfriend” and testified he had 
matured, changed, and become a responsible person (Tr. 52). 
 
 Applicant executed his SF 86 in July 2003, about a year before he was hired.  He 
answered “yes” to question 23 on the SF 86, asking if there were currently any charges 
pending against him. He disclosed the charges arising from the February 2003 incident, 
which were pending at the time he executed his SF 86. He answered “no” to question 
24, asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to 
alcohol or drugs, and he did not disclose the 2001 DUI charge. The instructions for this 
question directed him to “report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been ‘sealed’ or otherwise stricken from the record.” He also answered “no” to 
question 26, asking if, during the last seven years, he had been arrested for, charged 
with, or convicted of any offenses not listed in questions 21 through 25. He did not 
disclose the 1999 burglary charge, the 2001 DUI charge, or the arrest for false reporting 
and domestic violence in February 2002, all of which had occurred before he moved to 
New England. In this question, like question 24, he was directed to report information 
even though the case was “sealed” or otherwise stricken from the record. 
 
Applicant completed his SF 86 at home and spent “maybe a couple of hours” 
completing it (Tr. 71, 72, and 75). He made several handwritten corrections after it was 
printed, including corrections to his birth date, his mother’s first name, his sister’s first 
name, an employer’s name, and a supervisor’s name (GX 2 at 1, 3, and 5).  
 
Applicant testified he misunderstood the questions and was unaware that he was 
required to disclose his arrests because they were either youthful offender arrests, 
sealed records, or cases disposed of by nolle prosequi (Tr. 49). He admitted the arrests 
 
4 
 
 
in an interview with a security investigator in July 2004, about a year after he executed 
his SF 86, except for the February 2002 arrest, which was not mentioned. He also told 
the security investigator he did not intentionally omit information from his SF 86, but the 
arrests occurred during a hard time in his life.  He told the investigator, “I try to forget 
those issues in my life.” (GX 5 at 1.) At the hearing, he testified he did not remember the 
February 2002 arrest when he executed his SF 86 (Tr. 51). 
 
During cross-examination, Applicant testified he did not know why he did not 
disclose his arrests. He testified he did not omit the information for fear of not getting the 
job, but he “didn’t care to answer the questions,” because he did not expect to be 
offered the job (Tr. 77, 86).  He testified he may have mentioned some of his arrests to 
some people at work, but most of his coworkers and supervisors are unaware of his 
arrest record (Tr. 86). 
 
A senior draftsman who works with Applicant regards him as honest, 
knowledgeable, and helpful (AX A). A union steward who has worked for Applicant’s 
employer for 28 years and known Applicant since he began his current job testified that 
he trained Applicant and became his friend.  He testified Applicant is a quick learner, 
trustworthy, and has done nothing to raise doubt about his character (Tr. 27-32). This 
witness believed the security concerns were based on two sealed arrests, but he 
apparently was unaware of the allegation of falsifying the SF 86 (Tr. 31). 
 
A coworker who has worked for Applicant’s employer for 20 years and known 
Applicant for about four years testified Applicant is a hard worker, diligent, polite, a good 
friend, and “an all around good guy.” He believes Applicant is honest and “absolutely” 
could be trusted with sensitive information (Tr. 35-40). This witness was aware in 
general terms of the allegation of falsifying the SF 86 (Tr. 39). 
 
Another coworker and friend who has worked for Applicant’s employer for 20 
years and known Applicant for about four years testified he has never seen anything to 
indicate Applicant would be a security risk (Tr. 42-46). This witness was unaware of the 
allegations in the SOR (Tr. 45). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
 
5 
 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was charged with burglary in 1999 (¶ 1.a), charged 
with DUI in 2001 (¶ 1.b), charged with making a false police report and assault (¶ 1.c), 
and arrested for assault in February 2002 (¶ 1.d). It also alleged two warrants were 
 
6 
 
 
issued for his failure to appear on the charges of assault and making a false police 
report (¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). Finally, it alleges he was charged with assault and disorderly 
conduct in 2003 (¶ 1.g).  
 
 The record reflects that the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d duplicate each 
other because they are based on the same assault.  When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.d in Applicant=s favor.   
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant’s record of arrests and convictions is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Applicant’s record 
of criminal conduct began nine years ago and ended more than five years ago. His 
passive participation in the burglary was the product of alcohol, bad judgment, and bad 
company. He was an aider and abettor, not a principal. His other arrests arose from an 
ill-advised relationship long since ended. His life turned around once he broke up with 
his old girlfriend and started his current job. With the exception of the false police report, 
none of these offenses cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. His false police report, however, was the beginning of a pattern of 
falsehoods, followed by falsely identifying himself to a police officer and falsifying his SF 
86, discussed in greater detail below. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is established 
for the burglary, DUI, and domestic assaults, but not for the false police report.  
 
Security concerns arising from criminal conduct may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). Applicant’s current job was his first opportunity for a career and successful future. 
During the past four years he has gained the respect of his colleagues and mentors, 
 
7 
 
 
married, and acted responsibly. He has admitted his mistakes and wants to put them 
behind him. He no longer engages in crimes against property (i.e., burglary), alcohol-
related misconduct, or domestic violence. He has continued, however, to have problems 
with candor. I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is established for the burglary, DUI, and domestic 
assaults, but not for the false police report. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges applicant falsified his SF 86 by deliberately omitting the arrests 
and charges alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c and 1.d. The concern under this guideline 
is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). When a 
falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s state of mind 
when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 Applicant presented himself at the hearing as intelligent and articulate.  He had 
no difficulty understanding the questions on his SF 86 at the hearing. However, his 
explanations for not disclosing his full arrest record were implausible and contradictory. 
He finally admitted he “didn’t care to answer the questions” because he did not believe 
he would get the job. I conclude he intentionally omitted his record of arrests in his 
previous home state, thereby raising AG ¶ 16(a) and shifting the burden to him to refute, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
made no effort to correct the omissions from his SF 86 until he was confronted with the 
facts a year later.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). The first 
prong (“so minor”) is not established, because the falsification of his SF 86 is a felony 
under 18 U.S.C. § 1801. The second prong (“so much time”) is not established, 
because the falsification occurred in his current application for a clearance.  The third 
prong (“so infrequent”) is not established, because his falsification was part of a pattern 
of dishonesty, starting with his false police report in December 2001, continuing when 
he attempted to deceive a police officer about his identity in February 2003, and ending 
with his false answers on his current security clearance application.  The fourth prong 
(“unique circumstances”) is not established because the falsification occurred during a 
routine security clearance application.  Finally, his pattern of falsification casts doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). After considerable ducking and weaving during cross-
examination at the hearing, Applicant finally acknowledged that he chose not to make 
full disclosure of his criminal record because he did not think he would get the job. The 
circumstances in which he falsified his SF 86 have changed, in that he has matured, 
made new friends, married, and found a good job with a future. However, the last 
element of this mitigating condition (“unlikely to recur”) is undermined by his record of 
falsification in other circumstances. I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of 
establishing AG ¶ 17(d). 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This condition is not established, because 
Applicant has not made full disclosure of his criminal record to his supervisors and most 
of his coworkers. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is still a young man, but he is a substantially different person from the 
misguided youth involved in the burglary in 1999 or the person involved in a three-year 
dysfunctional romantic relationship that ended in February 2003. His outlook on life 
appears to have changed after he started his current job. He has matured and grown in 
many respects. However, candor is essential in the security clearance process, and he 
has not yet established a record of candor. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct and his 
falsification of his SF 86. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
