 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 05-00948 
 SSN: ---------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 30, 2003. 
On October 21, 2005, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines G and E 
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended , and modified (Directive).   
  
 Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the 
case assignment on February 21, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 
29, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 26, 2008. The 
government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2008.  Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted, with explanation, to allegations in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.c in the SOR under Guideline G. He also admitted, with explanations, to  
allegations in subparagraph 2.a through 2.g under Guideline E. (Applicant’s Answer to 
SOR, dated November 14, 2005). His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a complete review of the evidence in the record and upon due consideration, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor (GE 1). He has 
worked for his current employer for almost 30 years. Applicant is married with one child 
and three step-children. He has an associate of arts degree. He served in the U.S. Navy 
from 1976 until 1980. Id. During his military career, he served aboard an aircraft carrier 
and worked with an aviation rating. He held a top secret clearance. After his discharge 
from active duty, he served in the Reserves (Tr. 22). 
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol while in the Navy. In April 1986, Applicant was 
arrested and charged with (1) driving under the influence of alcohol, (2) blood alcohol 
level of .10 or above, and (3) unlicensed driver. He pled guilty to the first charge. 
Applicant was sentenced to attend 12 weeks of intensive alcohol information school. He 
was given a 90 day restriction on his driver’s license, received 36 months probation, and 
ordered to pay a fine of $750. He admits consuming alcohol, at times to the point of 
intoxication, from 1986 to at least September 2005 (Tr. 24). 
 
 Applicant was arrested on March 24, 1992. He was charged with (1) driving while 
intoxicated (DWI) and (2) driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He pled not guilty 
to count (1). The court found Applicant guilty on count (2). He was granted probation 
before judgment for one year and fined $250 plus court costs of $20. 
 
 Applicant has worked for his current employer, as noted above, since 1980. In 
1997, Applicant received counseling for having alcohol on his breath at work. He is 
diabetic (requires insulin) and maintains that the odor was not alcohol but due to high 
blood sugar level it may smell like alcohol. He further states that the only time he 
received any negative notice at work was when he worked under a certain supervisor 
with whom he had a conflict (Tr. 34-35).  
 
In January 1997, Applicant received an unsatisfactory evaluation from the same 
supervisor. He was cited for excessive absenteeism. Applicant had medical problems at 
the time. He had an angiogram and a stent put in his heart. In September 1997, he was 
given a work performance counseling for wandering off the job. Applicant admitted to 
the allegations in the SOR, but he explained at the hearing that he could not remember 
the circumstances. He was adamant that they were all given by the same supervisor 
with whom he had a personality conflict. He also stated the March 4, 1998 disciplinary 
counseling for failure to follow directions was also without merit (Tr. 40-43).     
 
On January 13, 1999, Applicant received a citation from work for a security 
violation. He does not know the reason for this violation. He was not working on 
 
3 
                                      
 
anything secret or top secret at the time. He went to security and asked about this 
violation. He wanted to see his record. He was told there is no record of the violation 
(Tr. 48). 
 
 On August 4, 2003, Applicant received a final written warning about personal use 
of the internet on a government computer. He checked his emails during lunch time. He 
received spam and the company told him not to check personal email again (Tr. 49). 
 
 Applicant was never court ordered to alcohol counseling, nor does he have any 
diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. He does not go out at night very much due 
to his medical conditions. He had a stroke in 2004. He does not go to bars anymore 
because he can no longer play darts and this was a form of entertainment to him. He 
won various titles for dart competition (Tr. 23). 
 
 Applicant currently drinks at home in the evening from approximately 5:00 p.m. 
until 11:00. He consumes four or five drinks. He will have two cocktails before dinner 
and then maybe two or three drinks before he retires for the evening. He explained he 
may have one drink per hour before he goes to bed. He reports that he does not put 
himself in any situations with drinking (such as driving) that would jeopardize him (Tr. 
57). 
 
   Applicant enjoys his current position and is very committed to its success. He is 
a well respected employee and a valued member of the team. He maintains a 
professional appearance and sets a good example to the other staff. He displays a high 
degree of proficiency and professionalism in his work.  He has been acknowledged for 
his innovation, expertise and support by his peer, the company and its customers (AE 
A-C). He has excellent rapport with his customers and his work exceeds expectations. 
His most recent Performance Appraisals (2005-7) rate him as outstanding (AE D). He 
received a prestigious award from the company in 2007. He is highly recommended for 
a security clearance by his employer.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on 
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to 
occupy a position … that will give that person access to such information.” Department 
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  In Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), the President set 
out guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information and determining 
trustworthiness within the executive branch.  
 
 To be eligible for a security clearance or access to sensitive information, an 
applicant must meet the security guidelines contained in the Directive.  Enclosure 2 of 
the Directive sets forth Adjudicative Guidelines which must be considered in the 
evaluation of security suitability. Paragraph E2.2., Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth 
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each 
guideline. Additionally, each security decision must be a fair and impartial 
 
4 
                                      
 
commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and circumstances, 
and the whole-person concept. 
 
 The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life 
to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”   
An administrative judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and 
carefully weigh the available, reliable information about the person.  An administrative 
judge should consider the following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
   
         Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in 
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to 
classified information. Directive Enclosure 3, Paragraph E3.1.14. Thereafter, the 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive, Enclosure 3, Paragraph E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue his security clearance.” Any doubt as to whether access to classified 
information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor of the 
national security. Directive, Enclosure 2, E2.2.2.  
 
     Analysis 
 
 Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate adjudicative factors, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations 
set forth in the SOR: 
  
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) The Concern; Excessive alcohol consumption 
often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment, unreliability, failure to control 
impulses, and can increases the risk of unauthorized disclosure of classified information 
due to carelessness. 
  
 In this matter, the government provided substantial evidence that Applicant was 
arrested in 1986 and 1992 for alcohol related driving incidents. Consequently, Alcohol 
Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) E2.A7.1.2.1 (“alcohol-related incidents 
away from work, such as driving under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other criminal incidents related to alcohol use”) applies. 
Applicant admitted that he consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of 
intoxication, from 1986 to at least 2005. Thus, AC DC E2.A7.1.2.5 (“habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment”) applies. 
 
 With the government’s case established, the burden shifts to Applicant to present 
evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against him. I 
 
5 
                                      
 
considered the Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) E2.A7.1.3.1 (“the 
alcohol-related incidents do not indicate a pattern”) and (AC MC) E2.A7.1.3.2 (the 
problem occurred a number of years ago and there is no indication of a recent 
problem”). There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based on “a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive. ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd.  Aug. 4, 
2004). If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.” Id. AC MC 1 and 2 have some applicability in this 
case. Applicant was found guilty of DUI in 1986. He did not have any alcohol driving 
incidents again until 1992 when he was leaving a party. He was given a Probation 
Before Judgment and successfully completed probation. Thus, the last alcohol driving 
incident was sixteen years ago. He has changed his drinking habits and does not drink 
and drive. He has no problems at work directly related to alcohol consumption and has 
received outstanding evaluations. His past conduct does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. The whole person analysis, infra, provides 
additional discussion of mitigating circumstances 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) The Concern; Conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations could indicate that the person may not properly 
safeguard classified information.  
 
 Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) E2.A.5.1.2.1 (“reliable, 
unfavorable information provided by associates, employers, coworkers, neighbors, and 
other acquaintances”), and PC DC E2.A5.1.2.5 (“a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations, including violation of any written or recorded agreement made between the 
individual and the agency”) apply. During the period in 1997 and 1999, Applicant had 
several counseling actions at work for absenteeism and alcohol on his breath. He also 
had a warning in 2003 concerning his personal use of the computer. He has more than 
30 years with his employer.  
 
 Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC MC) E2.A5.1.3.1. (“the information 
was unsubstantiated or not pertinent to a determination of judgment, trustworthiness, or 
reliability”) applies. The SOR was completed in 2005. Initially, Applicant admitted to all 
the allegations and did not want a hearing. When he testified at the hearing, he had 
explanations for the various incidents. He tried to find a record on the security violation 
and was told that there was none. I find under these circumstances that this mitigating 
condition applies to SOR 2.f. Also, the incidents are distant in time, and Applicant has 
performed in an outstanding manner since then. E2.A5.1.3.5 (“the individual has taken 
positive steps to significantly reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion, exploitation or 
duress”) applies. 
 
 
 
   
 
6 
                                      
 
Whole Person 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The objective of the clearance determination process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the person is eligible for a clearance. Indeed, the adjudicative process is a careful 
weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole person” concept. It 
recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions, 
motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking 
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature 
thinking, and careful analysis. 
  
 Applicant was candid in his demeanor and testimony at the hearing. He 
acknowledged that he did not want a hearing initially, and did not understand the 
process. He was forthright in acknowledging that he filled out his SF 86 a long time ago 
and the incidents are ten years ago. He has received outstanding evaluations. The 
incidents have been documented for twenty years and he does not understand why this 
is an issue now.  
 
 He has completed his alcohol probation and does not have an alcohol-related 
diagnosis. He does not drink and drive. He is no longer going out to bars to drink. He 
has a clearance and enjoys his work. He has letters of appreciation and commendations 
over the years. Despite his prior two alcohol-related incidents, he continued to perform 
in his work.  He never mishandled classified information and continued to work on a 
regular basis. His circumstances have changed due to his medical condition and his life 
is devoted to work. He works long hours and lives a quiet life. Although he admits that 
he still drinks alcohol every evening at home, he is adamant that he does not drink and 
drive.  He has no incidents or absences at work. His past three year evaluations are 
outstanding. His employers praise his commitment and accomplishments. 
 
 I have considered all the evidence and the “whole person” in evaluating 
Applicant’s security clearance determination. Applicant has mitigated the government’s 
concern pertaining to his alcohol consumption and his personal conduct. 
. 
FORMAL FINDINGS 
 
 Formal Findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
             
 Paragraph 1. Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-g:  For Applicant 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
      DECISION 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                              
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
  
 
  
