                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                        ) ISCR Case No. 05-02395 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Misuse of Information 
Technology, Personal Conduct, and Criminal Conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 21, 
2003. On August 1, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines M, E, 
and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified, 
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive).  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 8, 2006. He answered the 
SOR in writing through counsel on August 28, 2006, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on August 30, 2006. Department 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 12, 2007, and I received the case 
assignment on February 13, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 30, 2007, 
scheduling the case to be heard on May 9, 2007. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 26, which were 
received without objection with the exception of GE 19. Counsel for Applicant objected 
to GE 19 on the basis of authenticity. After argument by counsel, I overruled Counsel for 
Applicant’s objection. Also, because GE 20 consisted of two different parts, it was 
marked GE 20(a) and 20(b) for clarification purposes. Tr. 18-24, 142-144. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through Z, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 25, 2007.  
 
Before the hearing adjourned I held the record open to allow both counsel an 
opportunity to submit written closing arguments. Department Counsel’s closing 
argument is marked Exhibit (Ex.) I, and Counsel for Applicant’s closing argument is 
marked Ex. II. The record closed on June 14, 2007. Based upon a review of the case 
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing ¶ 2.d., which 
alleged Applicant was investigated by Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) 
concerning several files deleted from his employer’s common access drive and cutting 
tools found to be missing after his employment terminated in March 2001. Without 
objection from Counsel for Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion to 
withdraw  ¶ 2.d.,   Tr. 239-242. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 28, 2006, Applicant denied all factual 
allegations alleged in the SOR.  After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old Advisory Engineer, who has been employed by his 
defense contractor employer since March 2002. He seeks to renew his security 
clearance and currently holds a secret security clearance, which was initially granted in 
July 1991. GE 1, Tr. 158-159.  
 
 Applicant was born, raised and educated in India. He received his undergraduate 
education in India and was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree, majoring in 
Mechanical Engineering, in May 1975. He attended graduate school in the U.S. and 
received his Master’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering, in August 1981. He completed 
his graduate work in India and was awarded his Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering, in 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
February 1982. GE 5, Tr. 26-27, 160-161. English is Applicant’s second language. At 
home, Applicant speaks a mix of English and “local Indian language.” Tr. 162. 
 
 Applicant was married in August 1979. He and his wife have two adult children, a 
daughter and a son, both in their mid-twenties. GE 1, Tr. 157-158.  
 
 Applicant was employed at a major state university (university) from March 1, 
1984 until he was involuntarily terminated on March 21, 2001. During the 17 years 
Applicant was employed at the university, he held three different titles, Head of Surface 
Technologies Department, Professor of Engineering Science and Mechanics, and 
Senior Scientist. Tr. 26-27, 162-163, GE 7. Evidence submitted by Applicant supports 
the notion that he was viewed as a valued employee for the vast majority of his 
university employment. AE F through O. Some time before he was terminated, his 
relationship with his superior deteriorated, which lead to his being involuntarily 
terminated for “insubordination.”1 GE 7.  
 
 On March 21, 2001, Applicant was summoned to a meeting with university 
officials. When he arrived at the meeting, he was informed he could resign with a 
severance package, or be involuntarily terminated. He refused to resign and was 
involuntarily terminated. Tr. 28-30.  After working hours that same day, Applicant 
returned to his work site to collect his personal belongings and clean out his office.  
 
 What occurred when Applicant returned to his office is a topic of dispute. Shortly 
after Applicant left the university, university officials notified NCIS of the improper 
deletion of numerous sensitive, but unclassified, U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps 
research files and folders on a shared network drive. Applicant was believed 
responsible for the improper deletion of the computer files, which occurred on the date 
of Applicant’s termination on March 21, 2001. NCIS conducted an investigation, which is 
documented in various government exhibits. GE 22 through 26. 
 
 The SOR referred to three interviews2. Salient portions of those interviews are 
quoted verbatim in order of chronology3: 
1 Department Counsel and Counsel for Applicant dedicated portions of their written closing 
arguments to discussing the underlying basis for Applicant’s termination from state university. Ex. I, pgs. 
1-4; Ex. II, pgs. 10-14. Regardless of what label is applied as the reason Application left university, the 
fact remains that he was involuntarily terminated on March 21, 2001. Furthermore, he unsuccessfully 
challenged his termination seeking relief from state/federal administrative/judicial bodies. Applicant’s most 
recent unsuccessful challenge occurred when the Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against him by their 
Decision on June 30, 2004. GE 11. See also GE 7 through 11, which contain administrative and judicial 
decisions pertaining to Applicant’s unsuccessful challenges to his termination. 
 
2 I find that all Applicant interviews referred to in this Decision were prepared consistent with 
existing DoD policy and were provided freely and voluntarily. Tr. 147. See also testimony of DSS Special 
Agent, who administered Applicant’s two October 2005 signed, sworn statements. Tr. 175-195 
 
3 Quoting the Applicant/source documents was chosen versus summarization to accurately reflect 
what was, in fact, said. It also demonstrates the contrast in Applicant’s statements. Also, See Applicant’s 
testimony. Tr. 25-168.  
 
4 
 
 
 August 9, 2001 NCIS Interview. 4 
 
[Applicant] advised that after receiving this news (being involuntarily 
terminated) he walked around the campus for a short period and 
eventually returned to his office [at university]. [Applicant] reported that 
when he returned to his office he didn’t touch anything and telephoned his 
wife. Following the telephone call he claimed that he left the office at 
approximately 5:10-15pm and went to get his wife to tell her about the 
firing. [Applicant] claimed that he and his wife went directly home and that 
he did not return to the campus until 6:45-7:00 pm. [Applicant] said that 
when he returned to the campus he merely wanted to collect his many 
personal belongings and clean out his office. [Applicant] reported that he 
took plastic garbage bags from home to use when he threw away personal 
items only. [Applicant] said he didn’t see anyone upon his return aside 
from one new employee. [Applicant] advised that he then removed his 
books, thesis papers, etc., and took them to his car and threw away 
magazines and other periodicals. He also claimed that he deleted 
personal e-mails from the computer network. According to [Applicant], 
he also deleted his personal papers, thoughts and ideas from the 
computer in his office. [Applicant] adamantly denied destroying non-
personal research data, tool specimens or other Government 
program material. [Applicant] confirmed that a “bios” password existed 
on the local machines hard drive and stated he felt confident that no one, 
other than he, could gain access to the data on his work computer. 
[Applicant] concluded by stating that his computer was on when he left to 
attend the meeting with [university officials] and that he didn’t touch it 
again until after he returned from home at approximately 6:45-7:00 pm. 
 
Following the above interview, [Applicant’s attorney] was provided with an 
Excel spreadsheet that shows a significant amount of files, to include 
program related items, files and folders, being deleted on March 21, 2001 
from approximately 3:18 pm through 10:09 pm. [Applicant’s attorney] 
asked reporting agent if he could consult further with his client prior to 
answering specific questions relating to file deletions. [Applicant’s 
attorney] also stated that his client would be available in the future to 
answer additional questions regarding this matter after reviewing the 
deleted file list. GE 23, pgs. 4-5. (SOR ¶ 2.c.) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 This interview was conducted in the presence of Applicant’s attorney and was prepared by the 
reporting agent as a summarized result of interview.  
 
 
5 
 
 
October 20, 2005 Interview.5 
 
I did not delete or destroy computerized record (sic) from [a 
university] computer that contained US Navy proprietary information 
that dealt with aircraft engine parts and components. I did not delete 
files from the [university] shared network. I have been told by [DSS 
Special Agent] that NCIS agents said I was accused of deleting or 
destroying over 3500 files at [university] after my termination. I deny this. 
GE 5, pg. 2. 
 
January 26 2006 Interview.6 
 
On the day that I was fired, I was called to meet with [university’s] Human 
Resources Manager (HRM). I was told the reason for the meeting was to 
discuss some issues that I had raised such as my complaint of 
discrimination, credit due for my patents, etc. When I went to [HRM’s] 
office, [Second Level Supervisor(SLS)] was also in my office. I must say 
that I was surprised to see [SLS] in the office. He was my second level 
supervisor. I was asked to resign my position at [university]. I was told that 
if I did not resign, then I would be fired immediately. I chose not to resign, 
so I was told that I was fired. I understood that I was fired within seconds 
and I asked [HRM] for the letter notifying me that I was fired and the 
reason(s) for my termination. I was told that there was no letter, but I could 
return on another day for written notice of my termination. I indicated that I 
would return the following day. After leaving [HRM’s] office, I picked up my 
wife from her workplace. I told her that I had just been fired from my job 
and it was like she was in shock. She didn’t say a word. We drove home 
and talked some more about what had happened to me. I told her that I 
planned to visit with [university officials] the following day. I did not feel 
what they did to me was right. I received no warning and I was deceived 
about the true reason of my meeting with [HRM]. 
 
The more I thought about what had happened, I came to the decision to 
go back to my office that evening in order to gather my personal 
belongings. I went at night because I felt it might be difficult for me to face 
my colleagues the following day. I estimate that I arrived at my office at 
approximately 6:00 PM that same day that I was terminated. I remained at 
my office for about 90 minutes, which meant that I left at about 7:30 PM. 
While in my office, I gathered my belongings. I found some boxes and 
some garbage bags for trash and/or my personal effects. Some of the 
                                                          
5 This Applicant interview is a signed, sworn, statement conducted by a Special Agent of the 
Defense Security Service (DSS).  
 
6 This Applicant interview is a signed, sworn statement that was taken before a scheduled DSS 
polygraph. In light of Applicant’s admissions, the polygraph phase of the examination was not conducted. 
GE 3, GE 4. 
 
6 
 
 
items that I collected were numerous professional books. Some of these 
books belonged to me and some belonged to [university libraries]. My 
intention for gathering the library books was so that I could return them to 
the respective library. I estimate that there were approximately 10 to 15 
library books in total. I did in fact return all of these books to their 
respective library. Earlier today, I told [DSS Special Agent] that I did in fact 
delete most or all of my email from my [university] office computer that 
night. I felt that no one needed access to my email. I also searched for 
and deleted numerous files that I had created and stored on my local 
computer drive. I explained that these files although professional in nature, 
were my thoughts, ideas, etc and were not any of the estimated 3500 
missing files in question that were stored on the common access drive. 
(The files that contained US Navy/DoD related information.) I stated that 
with some of these smaller documents, I printed some of them for my 
future use. I explained to [DSS Special Agent] that as a professor, I 
needed to be on the cutting edge. I also stated that I did not want anyone 
else to have access to my ideas and thoughts. I also acknowledged to 
[DSS Special Agent] earlier today that it was very possible that I had 
deleted some files located on the common access drive, but it was done 
accidentally. In other words, I was in a hurry. I had also told [DSS Special 
Agent] that although I am a scientist, I am not as knowledgeable about 
computers as other people are. I told [DSS Special Agent] earlier today 
that I did not delete any files out of anger or revenge. I also explained that 
some files not found on the common access drive might have also been 
ones on my local drive that were deleted. 
 
[DSS Special Agent] provided me with a break to obtain something to eat. 
Upon my return, he began to review with me the polygraph examination 
questions. The first question that he read was “Did you delete any of those 
[university] common access computer files on purpose that night?” I 
answered “Yes”. In talking with [DSS Special Agent] further about this 
matter, I admitted that I did in fact deliberately delete many files that 
were stored on the [university] common access drive. I have been told 
several times that it was reported that approximately 3500 or more files 
were deleted from the [university] common access drive during the 
evening hours on the day I was terminated. These files reportedly 
contained US Navy/DoD related information. [DSS Special Agent] 
informed me today that one estimate indicated that the deletion or damage 
of these files caused an approximate loss of $20,000 to [university]. [DSS 
Special Agent] has further told me that the US Attorney declined to 
prosecute me because a majority of the files were recovered. As indicated 
above, I did in fact delete multiple files from the [university] common 
access drive. I honestly did not count the number files that I deleted. I 
don’t believe that the number of deleted files was as high as 3500, but I 
cannot state for sure the number of files that I deleted. Nonetheless, I 
now admit that the many of the missing files in question were files 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
that I deleted on the [university] common access drive. At the time 
that I deleted these files that were stored on the [state university] 
common access drive, I felt that it was my information that I had 
developed and no one else had a right to access it. I did not believe 
that the information belonged to [university] or the US Navy. I 
acknowledge that the [university] and the US Navy had a different opinion 
about the deleted files and they believed that it was proprietary information 
that belonged to the USN / [university]. Although I did not believe it at the 
time, I can now understand how they could think that they had rights to the 
information contained in the files that I deleted. I want to further state that I 
now have no qualms about the US Navy / [university’s] opinion that the 
information belonged to them. After all, I used their computer(s), their 
facilities, etc. I told [DSS Special Agent] that if I could do it all over again, I 
would not have deleted those files. I want to go on record and state that I 
would never do something like this again in the future. Also, while at lunch 
today, I thought about a situation with my daughter that occurred several 
years ago. She told me that I was stubborn. The more I thought about this 
today, I began to think that perhaps this could apply to this situation with 
the [university] missing computer files. Earlier today, I told [DSS Special 
Agent] that I did not delete any files out of anger or hostility for being fired, 
but I admit that perhaps that is not realistic. Perhaps out of my 
“stubbornness”, I have been in a denial mode that I was angry at the time 
of my termination, but maybe was truly angry. At the very least, as 
indicated above, I did not want people to have access to the information 
that I had worked on over the years. 
 
I acknowledge that [DSS Special Agent(1)7] interviewed me on 20 and 26 
October 05 as part of my DoD security clearance investigation. When 
[DSS Special Agent] called me, she gave me a general idea of what we 
would be talking about. I provided a brief explanation to her over the 
phone and she asked me to prepare an explanation in writing and bring it 
to our interview. I did in fact prepare written responses and these are 
incorporated into my sworn written statement, dated 20 Oct 05. In that 
sworn written statement, it reflects on page two of five that I did not delete 
or destroy computerized records from [university] computer that contained 
US Navy proprietary information that dealt with aircraft engine parts and 
components. I further indicated that I did not delete files from the 
[university] shared network. I indicated that [DSS Special Agent] informed 
me that I was suspected or accused of deleting or destroying an estimated 
3500 files at [university] and I denied this allegation. On page four of five, I 
indicated that although I deleted my personal emails, I did not delete any 
files related to my work. I explained that I had an informal meeting with the 
7 The DSS Special Agent, who took Applicant’s signed, sworn statement on October 20 and 26, 
2005 was a different Agent than the Agent who took Applicant’s January 26, 2006 signed, sworn 
statement. 
 
8 
 
 
NCIS in my attorney’s office and I had reiterated that I did not delete any 
files related to my work. 
 
[DSS Special Agent] pointed out to me that there is a large difference 
between what I told [DSS Special Agent(1)] and what I told him today. In 
trying to explain the differences in my statements, I told him that there was 
no intent to lie to [DSS Special Agent(1)] or deliberately omit critical 
information. I explained to [DSS Special Agent] that at the time of my 
interview with [DSS Special Agent(1)], I still did not believe that the files I 
deleted were proprietary information belonging to the US Navy or 
[university]. Even though my previous statement clearly reads that I only 
deleted email and I did not delete any files related to my work, I did not 
think of the fact that I did delete various professional files from the 
common access drive. I understand that persons reading my statements 
might come to the conclusion that I was not honest with [DSS Special 
Agent(1)], but I did not lie to her or provide a false statement. Listening to 
[DSS Special Agent] today, it helped me to re-think what happened and to 
think about perceptions versus reality. My perception was different from 
the US Navy or [university’s] perception of what happened. GE 2, pgs. 2-5 
(emphasis added). 
 
On the evening Applicant deleted files from the common access drive, he printed 
documents for his future use and acknowledged he “may have printed something less 
than five, small documents.” Tr. 37-38. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
When Applicant was hired by the university, he executed a Loyalty Oath. GE 
20(a). At his hearing, he acknowledged that any intellectual property he created during 
the course of his employment with the university belonged to the university. Tr. 118-119. 
He executed an Agreement Concerning Proprietary Rights with the university on March 
2, 1984, which elaborated on this notion. GE 20(b). The university also has established 
policy restrictions on the use of the university computer system and sanctions for failing 
to comply with university policies. Tr. 138-141. See university computer and network 
security policy document, GE 21.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant deviated from his admission in the January 2006 
Interview. In an effort to capture the essence of Applicant’s position, I summarized his 
position with him at his hearing. Applicant testified he only deleted his personal e-mails 
from his university computer account, i.e. if it had a “From” or “To” line, he considered 
the e-mail to be personal and if an e-mail had an attachment, it was “eliminated 
automatically.” Applicant now understands personal to mean e-mails which would 
include such things as an e-mail to his wife or his children or planning for a picnic. He 
added that “anything research-related” or “project-related” was non-personal. “But that 
was not my understanding when I was deleting those files. I thought this was all my 
personal communication. And it is a broader meaning of the word personal that I had on 
my mind.” Tr. 166-167. See also Applicant’s testimony, Tr. 25-167; Department 
 
9 
 
 
Counsel’s closing argument (Ex. I), pgs. 16-26; and Counsel for Applicant’s closing 
argument (Ex. II), pgs. 16-31. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. The entire process 
includes a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person 
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
E2.2.2. requires that “[a]ny doubt as to whether access to classified information is 
clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided 
drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
10 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Misuse of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Misuse of Information 
Technology Systems is set out in AG & E2.A13.1.1.:       
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s trustworthiness, willingness, and ability to properly 
protect classified systems, networks, and information. Information 
Technology Systems include all related equipment used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, and storage of 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
The applicable guideline lists four Disqualifying Conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Under AG & E2.A13.1.2.: 
 
AG E2.A13.1.2.1. (IT DC 1): Illegal or unauthorized entry into any 
information technology system; 
 
AG E2.A13.1.2.2. (IT DC 2): Illegal or unauthorized modification, 
destruction, manipulation, or denial of access to information residing on an 
information technology system; 
 
AG E2A13.1.2.3. (IT DC 3): Removal (or use) of hardware, software or 
media from any information technology system without authorization, 
when specifically prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations; and 
 
AG E2.A13.1.2.4. (IT DC 4): Introduction of hardware, software or media 
into any information technology system without authorization, when 
specifically prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
AG E2.A13.1.3. lists four Mitigating Conditions under this concern: 
 
AG E2.A13.1.3.1. (IT MC 1): The misuse was not recent or significant; 
 
AG E2.A13.1.3.2. (IT MC 2): The conduct was unintentional or 
inadvertent; 
 
AG E2.A13.1.3.3. (IT MC 3): The introduction or removal of media was 
authorized;  
 
11 
 
 
 
AG 32.A13.1.3.4. (IT MC 4): The misuse was an isolated event; and 
 
AG E2.A13.1.3.5. (IT MC 5): The misuse was followed by a prompt, good 
faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 Having carefully reviewed the evidence, I conclude Applicant intentionally deleted 
U.S. Navy proprietary files, containing unclassified, but military critical information, from 
a shared database from his employer’s computer without permission after he was 
involuntarily terminated from university on March 21, 2001. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) Having made 
this finding, application of IT DC 3 cited supra is the most pertinent Disqualifying 
Condition. I do not accept Applicant’s explanations, particularly those offered at his 
hearing. Weighing heavily against him were his admissions contained in his January 26, 
2006 pre-polygraph statement to DSS. GE 2. See Guideline E discussion infra.  
 
 Insufficient evidence was developed regarding the nature and quality of the 
approximate five documents Applicant printed following his involuntary termination on 
March 21, 2001. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the 
Applicant, I find application of any Disqualifying Conditions to SOR ¶ 1.b. unwarranted.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & E2.A5.1.1.:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations could indicate that the person may not properly safeguard 
classified information. The following will normally result in an unfavorable 
clearance action or administrative termination of further processing for 
clearance eligibility:  
 
AG E2.A5.1.1.1. Refusal to undergo or cooperate with required security 
processing, including medical and psychological testing; or  
 
E2.A5.1.1.2. Refusal to complete required security forms, releases, or 
provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of investigators, 
security officials or other official representatives in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The applicable guideline lists six Disqualifying Conditions that could raise 
security concerns under AG & E2.A5.1.2.: 
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.1. (DC PC 1): Reliable, unfavorable information provided by 
associates, employers, coworkers, neighbors, and other acquaintances;  
 
 
12 
 
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.2. (DC PC 2): The deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.3. (DC PC 3): Deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant and material matters to an investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
representative in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination; 
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.4. (DC PC 4): Personal conduct or concealment of 
information that increases an individual’s vulnerability to coercion, 
exploitation or duress, such as engaging in activities which, if known, may 
affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing or 
render the person susceptible to blackmail;  
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.5. (DC PC 5): A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations, 
including violation of any written or recorded agreement made between 
the individual and the agency; and 
 
AG E2.A5.1.2.6. (DC PC 6): Association with persons involved in criminal 
activity. 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3. lists seven Mitigating Conditions under this concern: 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.1. (MC PC 1): The information was unsubstantiated or not 
pertinent to a determination of judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability; 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.2. (MC PC 2): The falsification was an isolated incident, was 
not recent, and the individual has subsequently provided correct 
information voluntarily;  
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.3. (MC PC 3): The individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.4. (MC PC 4): Omission of material facts was caused or 
significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel, and the previously omitted information was promptly and fully 
provided; 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.5. (MC PC 5): The individual has taken positive steps to 
significantly reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; 
 
13 
 
 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.6. (MC PC 6): A refusal to cooperate was based on advice 
from legal counsel or other officials that the individual was not required to 
comply with security processing requirements and, upon being made 
aware of the requirement, fully and truthfully provided the requested 
information; and 
 
AG E2.A5.1.3.7. (MC PC 7): Association with persons involved in criminal 
activities has ceased. 
 
Applicant’s involuntary termination from university on March 21, 2001 was clearly 
established by the evidence. (SOR ¶ 2.a) Both counsel dedicated portions of their 
written closing arguments discussing the characterization of Applicant’s termination. 
Regardless of how one chooses to characterize his termination, the fact remains 
Applicant was involuntarily terminated and all of his subsequent administrative and 
judicial appeals were unsuccessful. These facts warrant application of DC PC 1 as a 
Disqualifying Condition. However, having concluded DC PC 1 is applicable, I cannot 
ignore the fact Applicant had a very successful 16-year career with university until he 
was involuntarily terminated, and also has had a seven-year successful career with his 
subsequent employer. I do not view Applicant’s difficulties with university as systemic or 
ongoing. While none of the Mitigating Conditions under this concern appear particularly 
on point, mitigation is available to Applicant under the “Whole Person” discussed infra. 
 
The Government withdrew SOR ¶ 2.b. Accordingly, further discussion regarding 
this allegation is not warranted. 
 
This brings the discussion to the gravamen of this case, i.e. Applicant’s honesty 
and credibility which are brought into question by SOR ¶¶ 2.c. through 2.e. As alleged, 
Applicant initially denied deleting numerous files containing proprietary information in his 
August 9, 2001 and October 20, 2005 interviews, and initially at his pre-polygraph 
January 26, 2006 interview. With the exception of his August 9, 2001 interview, which is 
summarized, the remaining October 20, 2006 and January 26, 2006 interviews are 
signed, sworn statements. The interviews/statements cited verbatim supra with 
emphasis added clearly demonstrate a significant disparity from what Applicant was 
initially reporting to Government investigators versus what he reported in his January 
26, 2006 interview. 
 
In evaluating which explanation deserves greater weight, I reviewed each 
statement under the context in which it was provided. The August 9, 2001 interview was 
conducted approximately five months after Applicant was involuntarily terminated from 
university, and Applicant’s counsel was present during this interview. In Applicant’s 
October 20, 2005 interview, he again reiterated his earlier denial. Almost five years after 
being involuntarily terminated and in conjunction with the renewal of his security 
clearance, Applicant was interviewed on January 26, 2006. On this day, Applicant was 
scheduled to take a polygraph examination and before administering the examination, 
the DSS Special Agent/Polygrapher interviewed Applicant. This interview resulted in 
 
14 
 
 
Applicant conceding that he deliberately deleted proprietary information on the day he 
was involuntarily terminated. Applicant’s admissions were reduced to writing and were 
incriminating. See Applicant’s verbatim statements under Findings of Fact supra.  
 
What appears more plausible is Applicant’s January 26, 2006 version of what 
happened. Understandably, Applicant was distraught and angry after being involuntarily 
terminated from a job he had successfully held for 17 years. Without belaboring the 
underlying reasons Applicant provided surrounding his termination, he considered the 
work he deleted to be his and furthermore that no one had a right to access it. The 
evidence establishes and Applicant concedes the information on the university’s 
common access drive was proprietary information that belonged to the university.  
 
I do not accept Applicant’s subsequent statements that whatever he deleted was 
“personal,” “inadvertent,” or “unintentional.” He was and is an intelligent, well educated 
person. I also note Applicant spent his working life in the U.S. and was a tenured 
professor with a Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering. He conducted his professional life 
speaking, reading and writing in English and he is credited with numerous publications. 
It is unfortunate Applicant chose to destroy the proprietary information he did. No doubt, 
if given the choice to relive March 21, 2001 again, he would choose differently. That 
choice placed him in a position that required him to later admit or deny his wrongdoing. 
Again, he made a choice that had repercussions. After reviewing the evidence, 
application of DC PC 3, DC PC 4, and DC PC 5 appear most appropriate. No Mitigating 
Conditions under this concern are applicable supra. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG & E2.A10.1.1.: 
 
A history or pattern of criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The applicable guideline lists two Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) that could 
raise security concerns under AG & E2.A10.1.2.: 
 
AG E2.A10.1.2.1. (CC DC 1): Allegations or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged; and 
 
AG E2.A10.1.2.2. (CC DC 2): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses. 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3. lists six Mitigating Conditions under this concern: 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3.1. (CC MC 1): The criminal behavior was not recent; 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3.2. (CC MC 2): The crime was an isolated incident; 
 
 
15 
 
 
                                                          
AG E2.A10.1.3.3. (CC MC 3): The person was pressured or coerced into 
committing the act and those pressures are no longer in that person’s life; 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3.4. (CC MC 4): The person did not voluntarily commit the 
act and/or the factors leading to the violation are not likely to recur; 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3.5. (CC MC 5): Acquittal; and 
 
AG E2.A10.1.3.6. (CC MC 6): There is clear evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. 
 
By its very nature, this concern calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. The government established its case under 
this concern by showing that Applicant falsified his interview(s)/sworn statement(s) as 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c., 2.d., and 2.e. I find, as discussed supra under Guideline E, that 
Applicant deliberately falsified these interview(s)/sworn statement(s). His falsifications 
are material and a violation of 18 USC § 1001, a felony.8 
 
Applicant’s recent falsifications bring to the forefront the criminal conduct 
concerns raised by his past behavior. I am required to consider Applicant’s overall 
questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the 
SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which his behavior is recent, the 
likelihood of recurrence; and Applicant’s explanations concerning the circumstances of 
the incidents alleged.9 
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s criminal behavior is 
recent and not isolated. Considering his criminal behavior, the nature and seriousness 
of his misconduct, his falsifications of his interview(s)/sworn statement(s), and his 
overall conduct as established by the government, I find his favorable information is not 
sufficient to mitigate the Guideline J security concerns. His behavior raises questions 
about his ability and willingness to follow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified 
information. His recent falsifications and lack of candor weigh against a finding of 
rehabilitation and positive behavioral changes. Accordingly, No Mitigating Conditions 
under this concern are applicable supra. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
8 It is a criminal offense to knowingly make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement 
or representation, or knowingly make or use a false writing in any matter within the jurisdiction of the 
executive branch of the Government of the United States. Security clearances are within the jurisdiction 
of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Egan, 484 U.S. at 527 (discussing 18 
USC § 1001). 
 
9ISCR Case  No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
16 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ E2.2.1.: “(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of 
participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2.2.3., the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense determination based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I note that except for being 
involuntarily terminated on March 21, 2001, Applicant has enjoyed a very successful 
professional life. He and his wife raised two children, who are successful and productive 
members of society. When Applicant’s termination is contrasted with his other lifetime 
accomplishments, it is relatively small by comparison. His difficulties at university are 
not ongoing and are isolated. Accordingly, under the “Whole Person Concept,” SOR ¶ 
2.a. is deemed mitigated. 
 
Unfortunately, Applicant’s deletions of proprietary information and subsequent 
falsifications surrounding those deletions are a different matter. The best indicator of 
future behavior is past behavior. Applicant’s conduct as it pertains to SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 2.c. 
through 2.e., and 3.a. raises lingering security concerns. His subsequent denials of 
wrongdoing at his hearing suggest to me that he is unwilling to accept responsibility for 
his actions and/or was attempting to divert his accountability or was simply not being 
truthful.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant had not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Misuse of Information 
Technology Systems, Personal Conduct, and Criminal Conduct considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
17 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a.   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
