 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 05-11010 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On June 1, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86). 
On June 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal 
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 4, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 18, 2007, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing ten Items, 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the FORM 
on January 14, 2008, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On March 27, 
2008, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 4, 2007, Applicant denied all factual 
allegations contained in the SOR, except ¶¶ 2.c and 3.a, which he did not answer.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and married. From August 1976 to October 1986, he 
was on inactive status with the U.S. Navy Reserves. He was a Petty Officer Second 
Class (E-5). He obtained a Top Secret clearance in March 1977. From October 2002 to 
January 2003, he was in the Navy’s active reserves, stationed in the Middle East. Since 
November 2003, he has worked for a federal contractor, as a security officer at a 
military base in the Middle East. Prior to his current position, he worked in various 
positions in private industry and experienced some periods of unemployment. (Item 5).  
 
 In June 2004, Applicant filed an SF 86.  In response to two questions inquiring 
whether he had any financial debts more than 90 or 180 days delinquent, he answered 
“No,” and did not disclose eight delinquent debts, falling within the purview of those 
questions. In response to a question inquiring whether any tax liens had been filed 
against him, he answered “No,” and did not disclose a state tax lien filed against him in 
July 2003 for income taxes owed for the years of 1999 and 2000.   
 
 On May 14, 2007, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories addressing 15 
delinquent debts, some of which were later included in the June 28, 2007 SOR. At the 
time he completed the Interrogatories; he was working in the Middle East and claimed 
he was not receiving correspondence from some of the creditors regarding the debts. 
He requested more time to investigate some of them. His specific responses in the 
Interrogatories to the debts, alleged in the SOR, are noted below.1   
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated July 2004, October 2005, March 
2007 and March 2007, Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleges ten delinquent debts and one 
outstanding tax lien, totaling $20, 911.  The status of those debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ Amount Creditor Status Response per Item 6 
a. $2,067 Credit card  Unpaid  Claims paid; no documentation
b. $715 Department store Unpaid Claims 14 yrs old 
c. $1,516 Unknown Unpaid To investigate debt 
d. $1,068 Department store Unpaid To investigate debt 
e. $1,759 Credit card Unpaid Claims paid; no documentation 
                                                          
1 Applicant indicated that he enclosed a current credit bureau report with the completed Interrogatories 
that provided proof of payment for some of the debts.  Department Counsel noted in the FORM that no 
such report was submitted. 
 
3 
 
 
To investigate 
f. $3,718 Car repossession Unpaid Admits debt; 9 yrs old 
g. $1,161 Unknown Unpaid No response 
h.  $3,764 Mortgage co Paid Item 10 at 2 
i. $4,686 State tax lien Unpaid Claims paid; no documentation
j. $225 Charge card Resolved 
after dispute 
Item 10 at 2 
k. $232 Apartment rent Unpaid To dispute 
 
 Of the total amount alleged in the SOR, Applicant provided evidence that he paid 
about $4,000.  Although he stated in his June 2007 Interrogatories that some of the 
debts were paid or would be investigated, he did not provide documentary evidence to 
support those claims when he filed his Answer to the SOR in August 2007 or 
subsequent to receiving the FORM in January 2008. A December 2007 CBR contained 
information on the above debts. (Item 10). 
  
 Applicant denied the Government’s allegations under Guideline E, regarding 
falsification of the SF 86 and offered no explanation for not disclosing the debts or the 
state tax lien when he completed the form in June 2004.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Based on three CBRs and his statements, Applicant has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing 14 years ago. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. The guideline includes examples of conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), 
the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
 
5 
 
 
judgment.@ Some of Applicant’s financial problems arose over 14 years ago and 
continue to the present. Because the problems are ongoing, this condition does not 
apply.   
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant did not offer 
any substantive evidence to support the application of this condition.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant did not present any evidence that 
he received credit counseling and/or that his financial problems are under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@ He provided evidence that he paid one of the eleven debts, warranting a 
very limited application of AG & 20(d). He produced documentation indicating that he 
successfully disputed one debt, which is sufficient to trigger some mitigation under AG & 
20(e), which applies when “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.”  AG & 20(f) is not applicable to the facts in this case.    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b and 2.c of the SOR that Applicant falsified 
his answers to three questions on the SF-86, because he failed to disclose specific 
delinquent debts and a state tax lien. The Government contended that those omissions 
may raise a security concern and be disqualifying. The disqualifying condition alleged 
under AG ¶ 16 in this case is: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied those allegations, but failed to provide an explanation for his 
denial. Based on the record evidence, the Government established said 
disqualification.  As a result of the absence of any explanation or evidence in 
refutation or mitigation of those the allegations, none of the mitigating conditions 
are applicable. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
Department Counsel argues that Applicant’s intentional falsification of his SF 86, 
constitutes a violation of Federal law, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, a 
felony, and raises a disqualification under AG ¶ 31.  Based on the finding under 
Guideline E that Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86, the Government established 
the disqualifying condition set forth in AG ¶ 31(c): “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.” None of the criminal conduct mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 31 is 
applicable because Applicant failed to address the allegation.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 53 years old, and 
served his country in the military reserves for more than ten years, during which time he 
held a security clearance for a period of time.  In May 2007, the Government sent him a 
set of Interrogatories, alerting him to the financial delinquencies that could adversely 
affect his security clearance. In his response to the Interrogatories, he claimed several 
debts were paid and requested more time to investigate other debts. He also indicated 
that some of the debts were very old, implying that he was no longer responsible for 
them. In June 2007, he received the SOR, detailing the specific debts in question and 
articulating concerns under the personal and criminal conduct guidelines. In January 
2008, he received the FORM, notifying him that he had an additional 30 days to 
respond and submit documentary evidence. Despite having approximately eight months 
to resolve the Government’s concerns, he took no action. His failure to responsibly 
respond to those concerns calls into questions his judgment and reliability. 
    
Given his long history with the military and familiarity with security clearances, it 
is troubling that he did not aggressively take affirmative steps to address the 
Government’s concerns. Without proof that Applicant has resolved all of his outstanding 
delinquent debts and established a budget and track record of managing his finances, 
similar problems are likely to occur in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues, personal conduct, and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
