1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ADP Case No. 06-13929
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge:
On May 20, 2003, Applicant submitted his original Questionnaire for Public Trust
Position (SF 85P). On October 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines J, H, and E.. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 27, 2007.  He answered
the SOR in writing in an undated Answer, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on November 13, 2007. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 18, 2007.  The case was assigned
originally to another administrative judge on December 27, 2007.  Because of case load
2
requirements, the case was transferred to me on January 4, 2008.  DOHA issued a
Notice of Hearing on January 25, 2008.  An Amended Notice of Hearing was issued on
January 31, 2008, because of a change in hearing location.  I convened the hearing as
scheduled on February 12, 2008.  The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4,
which were received without objection.  Applicant did not submit any exhibits.  I let the
record remain open until February 26, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit an alcohol
evaluation form, but I never received any documents from Applicant after the hearing
(Tr. 78).  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 22, 2008.  The
record closed on February 26, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations in  the SOR,
except the allegation in ¶ 3.a. He also provided additional information to support his
request for eligibility for a public trust position.  
Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and works for a defense contractor in the
health insurance business.  He started with this employer five years and five months
ago.  He has been promoted several times.  He works in the scheduling and processing
area of the business.  He has two and a half years of college.  His income is $45,000
and he owns his home. (Tr. 19, 39, 53-58; Exhibits 1, 2)
Applicant was arrested and given a citation to appear in court on May 8, 1998,
when he was at a friend’s house for a party.  The citation was for trespassing and entry
of a vehicle on the property of another person.  Applicant pled not guilty, and eventually
the charges were dismissed. (Tr. 21, 22; Exhibit 3)
Applicant was arrested on July 2, 1999, and charged with underage possession
of alcohol.  The police ticketed Applicant, but he cannot remember the details of the
incident or the disposition of the offense. (Tr. 22; Exhibit 3)
Applicant was arrested on August 5, 1999, on charges of underage drinking,
possession of alcohol (first offense), and adult failure to prevent underage drinking.  He
was convicted of underage drinking and possession of alcohol. His fine was
approximately $209.  The adult failure charge was dismissed.  This incident occurred at
his parent’s lake house where he invited friends to visit him. (Tr. 23, 24; Exhibit 3)
On or about November 2000, Applicant was again arrested on two counts of
operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated (OWI).  He was convicted of one count of
OWI.  His sentence was one year probation, 30 days in jail, and a fine of $453.  His
driver’s license was suspended for one year.  He obtained a restricted driving permit for
work purposes.  The other OWI charge was dismissed.  Applicant attended a friend’s
wedding, drank too much alcohol, and drove home.  He blew .17% on his breathalyser
test.  The terms of his probation included periodic reports to his probation officer, drug
education classes, and alcohol treatment classes.  At that time Applicant was 19 years
old.  He is not certain why he was arrested on two counts of OWI. (Tr. 24-26; Exhibit 3)
3
On or about September 2002, Applicant was arrested for identification card
violations and underage drinking.  He was convicted and fined $674.  Applicant had a
fake identification card.  He tried to enter a bar with the identification card, and he was
not 21 years of age.  The police were called and Applicant was arrested. (Tr. 26; Exhibit
3)
Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct on October 26, 2003.  He was
later convicted of this offense and fined $160.  He does not remember much of the
circumstances of this offense because he was drunk.  He does remember playing darts
in a bar. Applicant committed this offense while working for his current government
contractor employer. (Tr. 26, 27, 39; Exhibit 3)
On November 16, 2003, Applicant was arrested on charges of two counts
resisting arrest and obstructing an officer, possession of drug paraphernalia, and
unlawful deposit of human waste.  Applicant was traveling from bar to bar this night,
drinking, and could find a bathroom at 1:00 a.m. in the morning.  He urinated by a
dumpster.  A bar security officer saw him, told him to stop and come over to him.  The
security officer apprehended him, but Applicant did not think the security officer was a
real policeman, so they got into a fight, ending when the security officer wrestled
Applicant to the ground.  Applicant admitted he had the drug paraphernalia and was
urinating publicly, but did not think the resisting arrest charge was valid.  Applicant also
did not want to hire a lawyer to represent him.  He did not appear in court on the
appointed day, and an arrest warrant was issued for him.  The police found him when
he had an automobile accident on August 25, 2004.  The police checked their computer
records for outstanding warrants, and found Applicant had one.  He later appeared in
court, was convicted of the offense of unlawful deposit of human waste, ordered to
complete the first offender’s program, which included drug and alcohol counseling, 60
hours of community service. He was fined $243.  The other charges were dropped by
the court.  The alcohol counseling included a 30-day outpatient program for four hours
a week day.  Applicant completed the program.  Applicant worked for his current
employer when this incident occurred. (Tr. 27-31, 39; Exhibits 3, 4)
On December 20, 2003, Applicant was arrested on charges of possession of
marijuana and reckless driving, endangering safety, and operating while intoxicated.
He was convicted of these offenses and fined $507.  His driving privileges were
suspended for one year.  Applicant had a .09% result on his breathalyser test.
Applicant claims this arrest (alleged in Subparagraph 1.h of the SOR) is the same
offense as alleged in the Subparagraph 1.I of the SOR.  Applicant worked for his
current employer when this incident occurred. (Tr. 31-33, 39; Exhibits 3, 4)
On April 20, 2004, Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana, reckless
driving, and driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI).  He was convicted of reckless
driving and fined $151.  The other charges were dropped by the court. Applicant worked
for his current employer when this incident occurred. (Tr. 31-33, 39; Exhibit 3)
Applicant was arrested on May 4, 2004, for operating a motor vehicle after his
driver’s license was suspended.  He was convicted of this offense and fined $181.
4
Applicant does not remember why the police stopped his vehicle that night.  He also
does not remember whether his driver’s license was suspended for a longer period of
time because of this offense.  Applicant worked for his current employer when this
incident occurred. (Tr. 33, 34, 39; Exhibit 3)
Applicant was arrested on November 17, 2006.  The charges against him were
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia.  He was convicted of these offenses,
fined an unknown amount, and had his driver’s license suspended for another six
months.   Applicant was at a casino in his home state when this incident occurred.  He
put his coat in one place, and went to another place.  The casino security officer
thought the coat was abandoned, so they searched it to find identification to be able to
return it to its owner. During that search they found the marijuana and drug
paraphernalia.  He admitted the coat was his, and was arrested.  The marijuana in the
coat was about one gram, according to Applicant. This incident occurred while
Applicant worked for his current employer. (Tr. 34, 35, 39; Exhibit 3)
Applicant started using marijuana when he was 16 years old and in high school.
He used it once or twice a month at that time when he was with other students at
parties.  He guesses he last used marijuana in November 2007, at the age of 26.  He
does not remember the circumstances of that last use.  He claims he stopped using it
because he does not like it anymore.  He stopped using marijuana about two years ago,
and was going to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings.  The older members there
talked about God and Applicant had an “epiphany” at one meeting, concluding God
wanted humans to be happy, and marijuana use made him happy, so he quit going to
AA meetings and started using marijuana again.  He did not like AA meetings because
he felt he did not fit into the demographic mix of the membership.  Applicant was
younger than they were.  He also saw the members smoking tobacco and drinking
coffee, and thought there were “uppers and downers” in those substances also.
Applicant did not  submit a urine screen for drug use to verify his recollection that he
stopped using marijuana. (Tr. 36-39, 60)
Applicant resumed  drinking alcohol at the same time he started using marijuana
again.  He has no intent to stop drinking alcohol, particularly because he is now over 21
years of age. (Tr. 38, 39, 60, 68)
Applicant was in drug and alcohol counseling from November 9, 2004 to
December 9, 2004.  This counseling was court-ordered, apparently resulting from his
November 2003, December 2003, and April 2004, arrests.  Applicant admitted that the
counselor assessed him to be an alcoholic, but he does not have a copy of that
assessment.   He was in additional counseling from December 17, 2004, to February
18, 2005.  The counselor in that program also concluded Applicant had an alcohol
problem.  Since then, Applicant has not had any counseling or treatment for his alcohol
or drug problem.  Applicant was given until February 26, 2008, to submit the alcohol
assessment from those sessions, but did not send it. (Tr. 61-66, 78)
Applicant disclosed on his Interrogatories and during the hearing that he is
currently under the care of a psychiatrist for schizophrenia.  He takes two medications
5
to help control his mental condition.  He started treatment after being involuntarily
committed by his mother.  Applicant was in a hospital for a two week period, and then
later for a one  week period.  He has been under the care of the psychiatrist for a year
and a half since the original committment.  His condition has not affected his work.  This
event was not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 66-76; Exhibit 3)
Applicant signed his SF 85P, on May 20, 2003. On that SF 85P he listed, in
response to Question 20 (Police Record), that he was arrested for DUI in 2000, and
underage drinking and false identification offense in 2002.  Applicant did not list other
offense occurring in the past seven years, as required by Question 20.  Those offenses
were the 1998, July 1999 and August 1999 incidents.  Applicant claims any omissions
in response to that question were unintentional.  He used the available two lines on the
form to list two offenses.  The same SF-85P was signed again on April 26, 2005, and
has attached to it a “Form 85P Continuation Sheet” with Applicant’s initials on it and
signed May 4, 2005.  The Continuation Sheet contains offenses from March 31, 2003,
to August 25, 2004. He does not recall the circumstances surrounding the signing of
this document.  The Continuation Sheet contains a March 31, 2003, speeding arrest not
alleged in the SOR.  It also contains the August 25, 2004, date for offenses of resisting
and obstructing an officer, and possession of drug paraphernalia, which in the SOR are
alleged to have occurred on November 16, 2003.  Applicant completed the Continuation
Sheet when he and the investigator discussed his application.  Applicant got the
additional information about his arrests from the court website.  Applicant used the
words, “ guesses,” “believes,” “I think so,” and “I don’t remember,” when answering
questions at the hearing on this application issue.  Applicant’s answer to the
Interrogatories on this issue were that he pushed these matters out of his mind. (Tr. 41-
48; Exhibits 1-3)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a
fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is
6
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
trustworthiness decision. 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set
forth in AG ¶ 30:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns,
one of which may be applicable in this case.  Under AG & 31(a), “a single serious crime
7
or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted,” may raise trustworthiness concerns.  Applicant has 11 arrests or citations
involving alcohol and drugs over an eight- year period, nine of which resulted in
convictions with fines and driving privileges suspensions as parts of the court
sentences.  Six of these offense occurred while Applicant worked for his current
defense contractor employer. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from criminal conduct, three of which may be
applicable:  AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time elapsed since the criminal behavior happened,
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;”  AG  ¶
32(b), “the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;” and AG ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence
of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education,
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  AG ¶ 32(c)
requiring evidence that Applicant did not commit the alleged offenses, and AG ¶ 32(e)
regarding waivers of dishonorable military discharges and convictions with jail
sentences of at least a year, are not applicable to this case on the facts.
Applicant has the burden of proof and persuasion that the mitigating conditions
should apply.  Looking at those conditions and the facts of the case, Applicant’s latest
offense was November 2006, so insufficient time has elapsed to make AG ¶ 32(a)
applicable.  Nor were there unusual circumstances not likely to recur.  Consequently,
this mitigating condition is not applicable.  Applicant introduced no evidence of any
pressure to commit these 11 offenses, as required under AG ¶ 32(b).  Finally, while
Applicant showed he had been promoted by his employer over the past five years of
employment, that is insufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation for eight years of
criminal transgressions of the alcohol and drug laws of his state, and AG ¶ 32(d) is not
applicable. Therefore, Applicant failed to meet his burden, and no mitigating conditions
are applied.
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The trustworthiness concern relating to drug involvement is set forth in AG ¶ 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances,
and include:
8
     (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and 
      (2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of
drug paraphernalia,” are potentially disqualifying.  Applicant has a ten-year history of
marijuana use.  His last use of marijuana, according to his testimony, was in November
2007.  He did not submit a drug screen test result to confirm he is not currently using
marijuana.  He was arrested four times between November 2003 and November 2006,
for marijuana and drug paraphernalia possession.
The guideline also contains potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26.
Applicant has not shown by the evidence he introduced at the hearing that any of these
mitigating conditions apply.  AG ¶ 26(a) requires “the behavior occurring so long ago, or
so infrequent, or happening under circumstances which are not likely to happen again,
so as not to cast doubt about the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.”  His marijuana use is recent and frequent, so this AG is not applicable.  AG
¶ 26(b) requires “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,”
manifested by four criteria, none of which Applicant has satisfied.  In fact, Applicant did
not use marijuana for two years, then started using it again because it made him
“happy” to do so.  He has not shown there has been an appropriate period of
abstinence at present.  AG ¶ 26(c) refers to abuse of prescription drugs, which is not
the situation here.  AG ¶ 26(d) requires a “satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug
treatment program . . .  including a favorable prognosis from a duly qualified medical
professional.” Applicant does not have any assessments from the programs he
attended in 2004 and 2005, so it cannot be determined if he successfully completed the
programs, or what prognosis, favorable or unfavorable, was issued.  This AG is not
applicable.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
9
Under the facts of this case, AG ¶16.a (involving deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, or determine trustworthiness), and AG ¶16.b (deliberately
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official, or other official government representative) would seem to
apply.  
Applicant disclosed two of his arrests, one in 2000 and the other in 2002, in
Question 20 of the SF 85P he completed on May 20, 2003.  He had two lines on the
form to use, and he used them.  The form does state, “If you answered ‘Yes’, explain
your answer(s) in the space provided.”  Applicant did that in the two lines provided.
Later, in 2005, when interviewed by the Government investigator, he disclosed other
arrests that he obtained from the state court website.  He did not intend to leave off his
other offenses from the AF 85P in 2003, but only followed directions explicitly.  In
addition, throughout the hearing, Applicant testified he could not remember details of
some of the various arrests.  His Interrogatory answers on the disclosure issue were
that he pushed his arrests out of his mind.  He did disclose all of his arrests in 2005 on
the Continuation Sheet.  The Government was on notice in 2003, and then again in
2005, that Applicant had arrest problems for alcohol-related problems.  Finally,
whatever the cause of his lack of precise recollections, I believe he genuinely could not
remember all of these arrests, and find his explanation of a lack of intent to deceive and
falsify to be persuasive and credible.  Therefore, I conclude no disqualifying conditions
apply, and as a result, no mitigating conditions need be considered or applied.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  When these problems first began,
Applicant was a young man. (See AG & 2(a)(4).)  He knowingly used marijuana for 10
years, and had 11 criminal arrests or citations over a nine-year period.  (See AG &
2(a)(2).)   His offenses were serious, including driving while under the influence of
alcohol, using false identification for the purposes of obtaining alcohol while a minor,
10
and possessing drug paraphernalia AG ¶ 2(a)(1).  His use of marijuana, and alcohol,
were frequent, and his alcohol use continues to the present.  It is also voluntary on his
part. AG ¶ 2(a)(3), (5), (7), and (9).  Applicant has not undergone significant behavioral
changes.  He attended two alcohol and drug counseling programs, and AA meetings,
but returned to abusing alcohol and marijuana. (See AG & 2(a)(6).)  His past marijuana
usage, and current alcohol consumption when placed against his history of driving
under the influence of alcohol, makes the potential for coercion, pressure, exploitation,
or duress greater than normal, and demonstrates his overall lack of good judgment.
(See AG & 2(a)(8).) 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his
criminal conduct and drug involvement.  I conclude those trustworthiness concerns
against Applicant.  I also conclude the “whole person” concept against Applicant.  I
conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct trustworthiness concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.k: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
  Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                              
_________________
PHILIP S. HOWE
Administrative Judge
