 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------.  )       ISCR Case No. 06-24756 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), 
Guideline F (Financial), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is granted.  
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 27, 
2005. On August 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J, F, and 
E,  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 7, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing on October 7, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 23, 
2007, and I received the case assignment on November 1, 2007. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on November 7, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
2 
                                      
 
November 27, 2007. The government offered 12 exhibits (Exh.), which were received 
without objection. Applicant and three witnesses testified on his behalf and offered 13 
exhibits which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.I) on December 5, 2007. The record was kept open at Applicant’s request 
until January 9, 2007, to submit additional matters. On January 3, 2007, he submitted 
three additional documents which were admitted without objection.  
 
 The record remained open at the request of the government for submission of 
additional evidence which occurred on February 13, 2007, by video teleconference 
(VTC). The transcript of that hearing was received on February 22, 2008 (Tr.II). An 
period of 30 days was given to Applicant to submit additional information. Five 
documents were received on March 18, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend Answer 
 
 During the hearing, Applicant’s documentary evidence indicated that he was 
contesting one allegation concerning a 1997 conviction (SOR ¶ 1.b.) that he had denied 
to investigators but admitted in his answer. I advised him of the inconsistency, and 
asked him if he wanted to amend his answer. He answered in the affirmative. The 
government objected on the grounds that to do so would prejudice it’s case as it was 
not prepared to offer evidence on the allegation and wanted to do further research to 
produce testimony and records (Tr.I 90-93 and 127). I granted Applicant’s request to 
amend with the condition that the government could move to re-open the case to offer 
evidence on the allegation if they chose to do so. A request to do so was timely made 
by the government and the matter was re-convened by VTC on January 13, 2008, to 
hear further testimony on that allegation. No additional testimony or records were 
offered by the government, but Applicant was cross-examined further on the allegation 
as well as other issues in the SOR.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 25, 2007, Applicant admitted the facts 
alleged in the three criminal conduct allegations relating to Guideline J (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.a., 
b., and c.). He denied the criminal conduct allegations relating to deliberate falsification 
of his SF 86 answers (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.d.,e.,and f.). He admitted all of the 11 financial 
allegations involving debts under Guideline F (SOR ¶ ¶ 2.a.-l.) with explanations. He did 
not respond to the four personal conduct allegations under Guideline E (SOR ¶ ¶ 3.a.-
d.) relating to falsification of material facts on his SF 86, to an investigator, and on an 
interrogatory. At the hearing his attention was directed to the omission of a response to 
this allegation in his Answer. He then denied them all (Tr.I 13).  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a major defense contractor who has 
worked for the company since 1999 as a multi-disciplinary engineer. He has held a 
 
3 
                                      
 
security clearance since he was hired. He holds a bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering and a masters degree in computer information systems. He is highly 
regarded in his work by corporate supervisors and military clients who applaud his work 
ethic and teamwork (Exhs. E-J). He has received several corporate awards for his 
service on behalf of the company’s military clients (Exhs. K and L). He worked in Kuwait 
and Iraq for five months in 2003 during Operation Iraqi Enduring Freedom for which 
some of his awards were given. He finished his master’s degree by correspondence 
during his deployment.  
 
 In addition to his employment in the defense industry, Applicant has been a lay 
associate minister in his church for the past four years. He heads a young adult 
program for which he is responsible for budgeting and management. He also works with 
the youth of the church. He is well-regarded for his character and reputation by his 
pastor who testified for him and formerly worked for the same defense contractor (Tr. I 
110-118). He counseled Applicant concerning relations with his former girlfriend and 
before his marriage.  
 
 Applicant is also highly regarded by his pastor in his home city where he is still 
an associate minister and participates in services when he travels there. The pastor has 
known Applicant and his family since his youth. He applauds him particularly for his 
work with the youth in the community helping on various service projects for the church 
(Exh. B). He attempts to tithe 10% of his income to his church but does not achieve this 
every month. He contributes between $100 and $300 each month.  
 
 Applicant was married in September 2006 to a chief master sergeant in the 
Army. They have responsibility for his child from a former relationship and his wife’s 16-
year-old daughter. He and his wife each have gross incomes of over $5,000 per month 
and maintain separate accounts. His net income after deductions is approximately half 
that amount, which includes a deduction of $255 for student loans. In addition he pays 
approximately $600 for child care for his daughter. They own their own home and he 
drives an older automobile on which he makes small monthly payments. 
 
Criminal Conduct  
 
 The criminal allegations against Applicant in the SOR relate to two matters. The 
most recent one (SOR ¶ 1.a.) occurred in the city where he now lives on May 5, 2000, 
when he had a dispute with his girl friend at his home and was driving her home when 
the argument continued. He parked the car, they got out and the argument continued 
and was a physical confrontation was observed by the police and a witness. He was 
arrested and charged with an assault. He neglected to find out the date of the hearing 
was cited for failure to appear (Exhs. 2 and 4). He was found guilty and at the 
sentencing was sentenced to 12 months probation and fined $50. He disputes some of 
the underlying facts of the allegation but he was convicted and placed on probation 
which he fulfilled. He reported the matter at Question 26 of the SF 86. Applicant and his 
girlfriend continued to live together for several years thereafter. They had one child in 
2004 for whom he paid child support until August 2006 when he obtained full custody of 
the child who is now three years old. 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
 The second criminal conduct allegation (SOR ¶ 1.b.) is that he was arrested on 
April 25,1997, in the capital city of another state where he grew up, was given a criminal 
trespass warning, taken into custody for outstanding warrants, and admitted 
membership in the Crips criminal gang. The police record (Exh. 5) indicates that the 
case involved three men who had taken possession of an apartment where two women 
complainants lived. The men were selling drugs from the apartment and the 
complainants wanted the police to remove them from the premises. This is the 
allegation he denied to investigators but admitted in his answer to the SOR. He 
submitted exculpatory evidence at the hearing after he amended his answer to deny the 
allegation. The case was cleared administratively.  
 
 Applicant consistently denied this allegation at every opportunity in the security 
clearance investigation but without any of the evidence he produced at the hearing. The 
first denial was on September 12 and 13, 2005, when he was interviewed by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (Exh. 9). The second was in his 
answer to an interrogatory on August 2, 2007 (Exh. 10). However, his denial of 
participation in this 1997 conduct was then alleged in cross-pleadings in two personal 
conduct allegations and two criminal conduct allegations as making false statements to 
an investigator (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.e. and 3.c.), and in an interrogatory response (SOR ¶ ¶ 1. f. 
and 3.d.). His admission of the conduct in his answer was totally inconsistent with every 
statement he had made concerning the 1997 incident up until that time.  
 
 The exculpatory evidence offered at the hearing consisted of two affidavits. The 
first (Exh. D) is from Applicant’s brother who admitted that he was one of the three 
persons arrested in 1997. He had used the Applicant’s identity when arrested since he 
had a long criminal record and was fearful of the consequences of another conviction. 
Thus, the police record indicated Applicant’s name and not his brother’s name. The 
second affidavit (Exh. C) is from a cousin of both brothers who was in the group 
arrested who supported the statement in the brother’s affidavit that it was he and not 
Applicant was involved in the criminal conduct. Applicant was in engineering school on 
the date of the arrest in a different city 150 miles from the place of the arrest. He was in 
the third year of his electrical engineering studies and was taking final examinations in 
the Spring of 1997.  
 
 Applicant did not learn of the 1997 incident until the documents relating to his 
case were given to him during his background investigation (Exh. 5). When he learned 
of it, he thought the matter might involve a cousin who has the same first and last 
names as Applicant with a middle name which phonetically is almost the same. Only 
two of the four letters in the middle name ;are different from his own (Tr.I 37). Confusion 
in identity between the two had occurred since they were children involving 
neighborhood offenses such as bicycle thefts.  
 
 Applicant attempted to reach his cousin which was difficult because the cousin 
was in and out of jail during the time he was attempting to find him. However, Applicant 
eventually learned he was mistaken in his assumption as to who was involved in the 
incident when he learned from another family member that the person involved in the 
 
5 
                                      
 
incident might be his own brother. He noted on the police report that one of the other 
two arrested in 1997 was yet another cousin. That cousin told Applicant that the person 
listed with Applicant’s name in the criminal report was Applicant’s brother. When 
Applicant confronted his brother about the matter, he agreed to submit an affidavit to 
straighten out the matter. Applicant has helped his brother over the years financially just 
as he has with other family members. He helped his brother once within the last six 
months. A second affidavit was submitted from the cousin who participated in the 
offense which confirmed that it was not Applicant who was involved but his brother.  
 
 A statement was admitted in evidence from a retired assistant chief of police and 
the present assistant city manager for public safety of the capital city of the state where 
the 1997 offense occurred. He has known Applicant and his family for many years. He 
praises Applicant and his parents, and describes Applicant as a very respectful person 
with “highest integrity.” In addition, he describes applicant as a “model citizen who is 
“hard working and honorable”, and a “role model to family and community” (Exh. A).  
 
Financial 
 
 The financial issues involve 11 alleged delinquent debts of Applicant totaling over 
$11,000. Of this amount $5,000 is for some of his student loans (SOR ¶ 2. f. and g.). 
His pay was garnished for a default on one student loan in November 2005 (Exh. M) 
after his SF 86 was submitted. The total amount he owed in student loans for his two 
degree programs was approximately $45,000. They were in multiple accounts including 
several on credit cards. He made monthly payments from June 2006 until January 2007 
when a report was made on the payments (Exh. 12, Item 4). He applied to consolidate 
these loans on March 1, 2007 (Tr. I 68). They were consolidated in August 2007 and 
are being paid in the amount of $255 per month with a voluntary assignment of funds 
from his pay.  
 
 The other large debt is for an assessment of $3,800 by a former landlord (SOR ¶ 
2.a.). It has been owed since August 2007 when Applicant moved from the apartment 
complex where he was a tenant. The manager claimed he had moved before his lease 
expired but Applicant disputed the claim and the amount of the assessment. He settled 
this debt for $2,500 which he paid by check on March 14, 2008 (Exh. P 4).  
 
 Other debts of Applicant are as follows:  
 
1. A telephone bill for $559 (SOR ¶ 2.h.) was disputed and deleted from his 
account (Exh. N 2 and Tr. I 56).  
 
2. Two debts to a local government office for $589 and $170 (SOR ¶ ¶ 2.j. and k.) 
relating to child support were canceled as shown by a letter from the collection 
agency (Exh. P 2). 
 
3. He settled a credit card debt of $915 (SOR ¶ 2. e.) by payment of $631 on 
March 10, 2008 (Tr. I 59).  
 
 
6 
                                      
 
4. He paid a hospital bill (SOR ¶ 2.d.) for $570 that became delinquent in August 
2007 and was acknowledged as paid in full by the creditor on December 17, 
2007 (Exh. N 3).  
 
5. He has written to a credit agency for information about two other small medical 
bills totaling $68 (SOR ¶ ¶ 2.b. and c.) that he cannot identify (Exhs. O and P 1). 
 
6. He voluntarily supplied information about payment of two bills not listed on the 
SOR (Exh. P 1).     
 
7. He submitted evidence in response to the security investiation interrogatory 
(Exh. 11) of payment and explanation as requested by a DOHA security 
specialist of several debts which were not cited in the SOR since they were paid 
in February and March 2007.  
 
 The payment and consolidation of these debts have reduced the amounts still 
owed by Applicant to only a few hundred dollars. He tried to refinance his home to be 
able to pay all the debts but his credit rating was too low. The actions taken to 
investigate, pay, or reduce these debts were not as timely as they might have been, but 
the debts were confusing particularly the number and amounts of the student loan 
debts.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 Applicant did not acknowledge seven of the eleven alleged delinquent debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and f.-k.) in response to Question 38 on his SF 86 relating to delinquent 
debts of over 180 days for the past seven years (SOR ¶ 3.a.). These concerned four 
categories of debts, i.e. student loans, rental claim, a telephone bill, and to a county 
government. He did not report the garnishment for student loan debt at Question 34 
(SOR ¶ 3.b.) since the garnishment was made in November 2005 six months after the 
SF 86 was filed. He denied the alleged 1997 criminal conduct to an investigator and in 
response to a DOHA interrogatory (SOR ¶¶ 3.c. and d.). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
 
7 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns for an 
applicant. One of them that may be a disqualifying condition (DC) is a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses (AG ¶ 31 (a)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
 Possible mitigating factors under the guideline that could be applicable are that 
so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened that it does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment (AG ¶ 32 (a)), or 
there is evidence of successful rehabilitation including but not limited to passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, and a good employment record (AG ¶ 
32 (d)). The second mitigating factor raises the issue of rehabilitation. The domestic 
incident for which he was fined and placed on probation is the only offense that he has 
committed. He reconciled with the person, fathered her child, and now has full custody 
of the child. Applicant’s conduct during the past seven years since 2000 has been 
without fault. This allegation is mitigated by the passage of time and evidence of 
rehabilitation.  
 
 Applicant has established to my satisfaction his lack of any involvement in the 
1997 incident. The government has implied (Tr.II 17) that his financial assistance to his 
brother might have caused his brother to submit a false affidavit but there is nothing to 
establish such a fact. He has helped other members of his family as well. The evidence 
introduced at the hearing particularly from the senior public safety official and the family 
minister (Exhs. A and B), indicates strongly that the allegation of criminal activity in 1997 
is clearly out of character with the life, behavior, reputation, and conduct of Applicant. 
He was a university engineering student at the time in school 150 miles from the place 
of the incident. The affidavits of the two culprits in the crime, both members of his 
family, establish that he was not a participant in that criminal activity. I conclude that the 
allegation has been refuted.  
 
Guideline F, Financial 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt and was unable to pay 
some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 
9 
                                      
 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ I find the 
behavior occurred under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it 
does not raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
The evidence raises this potentially mitigating condition.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has resolved most of the delinquent debts, either by 
payment or settlement. He is now on financially sound footing and prepared for future 
contingencies. Despite delays in resolving some of the debts, he has made substantial 
progress in doing so beginning with those he resolved in early 2007 while in discussion 
with DOHA in his response to the interrogatory. I conclude that the mitigating conditions 
apply.  
 
Guideline E Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about and an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information (AG ¶ 15). 
 
 Conditions that could raise a security concern and be disqualifying include the 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire (AG ¶ 16 (a)). Applicant’s failure to report certain 
financial matters at Question 38 (Delinquent debts of over 180 days), and at Question 
34 (Wage Garnishments) on his SF 86, prompted security concerns under Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). The evidence produced at the hearing showed that the wage 
garnishment occurred November 17, 2005 (Exh. P 5) after the SF 86 was filed. Since I 
have concluded that Applicant did not participate in the 1997 criminal conduct, I 
conclude in his favor on the allegations of false statements to a government investigator 
and in answers to an interrogatory denying the conduct.  
 
 The failure to report seven of the delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and f.-k.) which 
relate to three categories of debts, student loans, rental damages claim, telephone bill, 
and county government, was explained by Applicant as because he was in the process 
of consolidating the extensive student loans (Tr. I 74), was disputing the rental bill (Tr. I 
59 and 70), had a current account with the same phone company and had paid the debt 
in 200 (Tr. II 40, 41 and Exh. N-2), and that the county debts were related to child 
support payments which had been resolved (Tr.I 59 and Exh. P-5).  
 
 
10 
                                      
 
 The requirement of the guideline is that the omissions be deliberately false. I 
conclude that they were not.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. He has taken affirmative action to 
pay or resolve most of the delinquent debts raising security concerns. (See AG & 
2(a)(6)). While some debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security 
concerns (AG & 2(a)(1)). The 1997 criminal allegation has been shown to my 
satisfaction to be in error. The 2000 offense has not recurred nor has any other criminal 
conduct and it is unlikely to happen again. He has show responsibility toward the victim 
of the 2000 offense and taken full responsibility for their child. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant 
 
11 
                                      
 
    Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline F: For APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.e:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.f:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.g: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.h: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.i: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.j:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.k: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.l:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 3.a:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 3.b:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 3.d: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge 
