1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------. )       ISCR Case No. 06-26073
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Troy Williams, Personal Representative
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On, November 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines J and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 19, 2007, admitted all of the
allegations and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 23,
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 21, 2008 scheduling it for March
12, 2008. During the hearing, I received 10 government exhibits, four Applicant exhibits,
and the testimony of two Applicant witnesses. At department counsel’s request, I took
administrative notice of the state code governing driving under the influence of alcohol
and refusal to take breathalyzers. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March
2
19, 2008. Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old single man with three children, ages 20, 16, and 13.
He has a high school education. He works for a contractor on a military base as a sheet
metal welder. According to his supervisor, he is an outstanding employee with proven
leadership abilities (Exhibit A). 
Applicant lived with the mother of children through early 1996. They had a
volatile relationship. In March 1996, he spotted her driving sitting in her car with a male
passenger. They were separated at the time, with a protective order in place. Enraged,
he ran toward the car, as the passenger fled from the car. Applicant then dragged her
from the car and began brutally beating her. He did not cease the attack until several
bystanders intervened (Exhibit 2). Applicant then went to her home to remove some
jointly-owned furniture. Unable to procure a moving truck, he destroyed it with a knife
(Tr. 70, Exhibit 9 at 10). 
Subsequently, Applicant was charged with assault, violation of a protective order,
battery, and assault with a deadly weapon (Tr. 73). While the trial was pending, he was
charged three times with contempt for failure to appear at various pre-trial hearings
(Exhibit 4 at 2). The record does not indicate whether the contempt charges were civil or
criminal. In July 1996, he was sentenced to three years probation, and ordered to pay
restitution (Exhibit 2).
In April 2000, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana and violation
of probation. He was sentenced to 30 days in jail and fined. At the hearing, Applicant
testified that the marijuana belonged to his brother, and that he took the charge for him
(Tr. 70). Earlier, during an interview with a security clearance investigator, Applicant
stated the marijuana was his (Tr. 79). When asked by department counsel to explain
why he told the investigator the marijuana was his, if it actually belonged to his brother,
Applicant responded, “[b]ecause he didn’t ask if it was my brother’s” (Tr. 79).
In February 2001, Applicant was charged with theft, less than $500 after his ex
girlfriend accused him of stealing her mail (Tr. 32). The charge was not prosecuted.
In March 2001, Applicant and his ex-girlfriend got into a heated argument in a
basketball gym where their daughter was playing. When the ex-girlfriend began striking
Applicant, he “physically restrained” her (Tr. 33). Applicant was then charged with
assault. The charge was nolle prossed.
In September 2005, Applicant was charged with, among other things, attempting
to drive a vehicle while impaired by alcohol. In November 2005, Applicant was again
charged with attempting to drive a vehicle while impaired by alcohol. The cases were
3
consolidated. Currently, the trial is pending. Applicant failed to list the second alcohol-
related charge, as required, on a 2006 security clearance application. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations” (Id.).
Applicant has a history of criminal activity including a domestic violence-related assault
charge, a drug charge, and two alcohol-related charges. The government did not
establish that the contempt charges were criminal, therefore, I find in Applicant’s favor
with respect to SOR subparagraphs 1.c through 1.e.
The assault and the drug charges led to convictions, and the alcohol-related
charges are still pending. AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses,” applies.
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant’s
good employment record constitutes evidence of rehabilitation. It is greatly outweighed
by the extent, seriousness, and recency of his criminal conduct. Also, Applicant
4
repeatedly demonstrated a lack of credibility throughout the investigative process by
providing contradictory explanations for the 2000 marijuana charge, and minimizing the
severity of the 1996 assault on his then-girlfriend. I conclude his criminal conduct
remains a security concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s security clearance application omissions raise the
issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” applies.
Because Applicant was not credible (see Criminal Conduct section, supra), I do
not believe his explanation for the security clearance application omissions. I conclude
AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
I considered the whole person factors in my analyses of the criminal and
personal conduct sections of the decision, and my analysis does not support a favorable
outcome. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
5
Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f - 1.j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
