                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08273 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Hong Kong, is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and has lived in 
the United States since 1993. Applicant’s grandmother and uncle are citizens and 
residents of Hong Kong. His mother and sister are dual citizens of the United States and 
Hong Kong living in the U.S. His fiancée is a legal resident of the U.S., a citizen of Hong 
Kong, who has lived in the U.S. since 2000. 
 
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and evidence, I 
conclude Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
guideline B, foreign influence. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 26, 2007, detailing security concerns under 
Foreign Influence.  
  
 On December 11, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated January 15, 2008. Applicant's 
response to the FORM was due 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. A 
response was due on February 21, 2008. No response had been received. On March 
27, 2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 Within the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Hong Kong and the People's Republic of 
China (PRC), along with nine attachments. The facts administratively noticed are limited 
to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. Those 
facts are set out in the Findings of Facts, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations, with 
explanations, for ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old intern who has worked for a defense contractor since 
January 2002, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant was born in Hong Kong. In 1993, he—then age 13—moved to the U.S. 
with his mother and sister. While living in Hong Kong, Hong Kong was a colony of the 
United Kingdom. In 1997, it reverted to China. Since being in the U.S., Applicant 
attended middle school, high school, and obtained degrees in computer engineering 
and piano. In December 2004, he became a U.S. citizen. (Item 4) He has no foreign 
interests, assets, or property in Hong Kong. He surrendered his Hong Kong/United 
Kingdom passport and is willing to renounce his Hong Kong citizenship. (Item 3) In 
August 2007, Applicant appeared at this company’s security office and presented his 
United Kingdom passport for destruction. (Item 5) The passport had expired in April 
2007.  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the United States and Hong Kong. In 1993, 
she moved to the U.S. and became a U.S. citizen in 1999. She currently is a pastry 
chief residing in the U.S. She has never worked for the government of Hong Kong or 
China. His mother owns a home in the U.S. When Applicant’s father died, his “mother 
experience a lot of paper works” to obtain access to his father’s bank account. (Item 3) 
His mother determined it was better for her to have a joint bank account with Applicant 
to avoid difficulty on her death. The account has approximately $48,000 in it. (Item 5) 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
Applicant believes the money is his mother’s money and he has no entitlement to it until 
her death. His assets in the U.S. are worth approximately $36,000. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant’s sister is also dual citizen of the United States and Hong Kong. In 
1993, she—then age 10—moved to the U.S. and became a U.S. citizen in 1999. She 
attended middle school, high school, and college in the U.S. She owns a restaurant. In 
1987, Applicant’s little sister born was born in the U.S. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée, a nurse, is a citizen of Hong Kong. She is a legal resident of 
the U.S. and has lived in the U.S. since 2000. In 2007, they purchased a home together 
in the U.S.  
 
 Applicant’s uncle and grandmother are citizens and residents of Hong Kong and 
neither have ever been employed by the government of Hong Kong or China. The only 
time he talks with them is when he is at his mother’s and she calls them. Calls are 
normally made at holidays such as New Year’s Day and Christmas. The calls routinely 
consist of greetings and checking on health. His uncle was never employed by the 
government of China or Hong Kong. His relationship with his uncle, his father’s brother, 
has become more distant following his father’s death.  
 
Hong Kong  
I take administrative notice of the following facts. The People's Republic of China 
is an authoritarian state controlled by the Chinese Communist Party. It has a poor 
record of protecting human rights. Its interests are hostile to the United States. Since 
1997, Hong Kong has been a special administrative region of China, which enjoys a 
high degree of autonomy, except in defense and foreign affairs. Hong Kong remains a 
free society, and its citizens have rights protected by law. The government of Hong 
Kong generally respects the human rights of its residents. The possibility exists that the 
government would attempt to exploit or pressure its residents to act adversely to the 
interests of the United States, but the risk is not as great as in the PRC. 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
 
 
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG & 6) 
 
Applicant’s uncle and grandmother are citizens and residents of Hong Kong. His 
mother, who he maintains a joint bank account with, and sister are dual U.S. and Hong 
Kong citizens living in the U.S. His fiancée is a citizen of Hong Kong and legal resident 
 
 
 
5
of the U.S. Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, 
applicable conditions that could raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information.”  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if a relative lives in a 
foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb.15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
A family connection can create a potential conflict of interest when the 
relationships are sufficiently close in nature to raise a security concern over one’s desire 
to help their family. In assessing whether relatives are vulnerable to exploitation, it is 
helpful to consider several factors, including the character of the government of the 
relevant foreign country. The PRC is an authoritarian state controlled by the Chinese 
Communist Party with a poor record of protecting human rights. Its interests are hostile 
to the United States. The government of Hong Kong generally respects the human 
rights of its residents. Since 1997, Hong Kong has been a special administrative region 
of China, which enjoys a high degree of autonomy, except in defense and foreign 
affairs. Hong Kong remains a free society, and its citizens have rights protected by law. 
The possibility exists that the government would attempt to exploit or pressure its 
residents to act adversely to the interests of the United States, but the risk is not as 
great as in the PRC. 
 
In every case where relatives live overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is not substantiated. Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1993, when he was 
13. His grandmother and uncle live in Hong Kong. However, since his father’s death, 
Applicant’s relationship with his uncle has become distant. His contact with these two 
relatives consists of calls made at holidays when his mother initiates the calls. The calls 
are short and restricted to greetings and exchanges about health. 
 
Applicant has mitigated the concern over his grandmother’s and uncle’s 
residence in Hong Kong. Under MC & 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either 
because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Neither relative is in a position 
connected with the Chinese government or engaged in activities that would likely cause 
 
 
 
6
Applicant to be exploited or placed in a position of having to choose between them and 
the U.S. His contacts with these two relatives appear to be infrequent and so casual as 
not to create a risk of foreign influence.  
 
Applicant has not lived in Hong Kong since 1993. Applicant=s ties to Hong Kong 
have become minimal over the years. His ties with the U.S. are much stronger than his 
ties with Hong Kong.  
 
Applicant’s closer relatives, his mother and sisters, and his fiancée all live in the 
U.S. His mother and sisters are U.S. citizens. His youngest sister was born in the U.S. 
and has lived nowhere other than the U.S. His other sister and mother are naturalized 
U.S. citizens. His mother and sister have solid connections with the U.S. His sister 
obtained her education in the U.S. and works in the U.S. His mother’s job and home are 
in the U.S. Applicant and his mother have a joint account, but he sees the money as his 
mother’s until she dies. Currently, he feels no entitlement to the money. It is speculative 
whether there will be any money in the account upon his mother’s death. Applicant lives 
with his fiancée in a home they purchased together in the U.S. His fiancée is a legal 
resident of the U.S. who has lived in the U.S. since 2000, but is a citizen of Hong Kong.  
 
None of Applicant’s relatives have ever worked for the Chinese or Hong Kong 
government. There is no evidence any of them are involved with organizations which 
seek to harm the U.S.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Hong Kong and the PRC 
and the heavy burden an Applicant carries when he has family members in the PRC.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency 
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is 
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
 
 
 
7
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation 
or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
While certain danger exists for all living in Hong Kong, Applicant’s grandmother 
and uncle are in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in Hong 
Kong. Applicant is a mature person. He has lived in the U.S. for 15 years, and has been 
a naturalized citizen for three. Applicant’s fiancée has been living in the U.S. since 2000 
and is a legal resident. Applicant completed middle school and high school in the U.S. 
and earned his degree from U.S. institutions. His ties to the U.S. are much stronger than 
his ties to two relatives living in Hong Kong. There is no evidence he has ever taken any 
action that could cause potential harm to the U.S. After taking his U.S. oath of 
citizenship he surrendered his UK/Hong Kong passport, which subsequently expired.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
