                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 07-07272
SSN: -----------------  )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On November 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 29, 2007, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on January 2, 2008, and was scheduled for
hearing on January 29, 2008.  A hearing was held on January 29, 2008, for the purpose
of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of two exhibits; Applicant relied on three witnesses (including herself) and
2
eight exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on February 6, 2008.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified
information is granted.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of nine
documents:  Background Note: Taiwan, U.S. Department of State (April 2007); Taiwan:
recent Developments and U.S. Policy Choices, Congressional Research Service, Library
of Congress (October 2006); Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage 2000, National Counterintelligence Center; Press
Release, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (WD NY April 2006); Press Release,
U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (ED VA January 2007); Statement of Facts
[stipulated], United States v. Keyser, Crim. Case No.1:05CR543, (ED VA December
2005); Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency
OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS) (June 2004); Background Note: China, U.S. Department of
State (January 2007); 2006 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission (November 2006); Annual Report to Congress on foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage 2005, National Counterintelligence Executive -2005
(August 2006); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, China (March 2007;
Consular Information Sheet on China, U.S. Department of State (March 2007).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 2007); ISCR
Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 2006).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.   See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Taiwan.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evi.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Taiwan’s current state.  
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
         At the outset of the hearing, Applicant confirmed her waiver of the 15-day written
notice requirement in the Additional Procedural Guidance of the Directive.  The 15-day
written notice requirement was, accordingly, waived. 
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged (a) to have parents who are citizens and
residents of Taiwan, (b) to have expressed in July 2007 that she has the responsibility to
take care of her parents, (c) to have a paternal grandfather, and many aunts, uncles,
cousins, and friends who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, (d) to have a friend who is
a citizen of Taiwan who resides in the U.S., (e) to have a father who served as a major in
a AS division of the Taiwan AF from approximately 1985 to April 1991, (f) to have a
3
paternal grandfather who served in the Taiwan military from approximately 1943 until
1968, (g) to have various uncles and cousins who have served in the Taiwan military, (h)
to have two uncles who currently work for the Taiwan government, (I) to have traveled to
Taiwan in approximately December 1999, June 2001, May 2004, and December 2006 to
visit her parents and relatives, and also in August 2004 to attend her grandmother’s
funeral, (j), to have stated in July 2007 that she is vulnerable to pressure, coercion, or
duress based on her family members’ non-U.S. citizenship, and (k) to have received
approximately $15,000.00 from her father between November 2006 and January 2007.
For her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations.  She denied any current financial support for her parents, but
acknowledged her responsibility to support her parents should they require it.  She
claimed to have only brief contact with her relatives other than her parents.  She
admitted to having a good friend in the U.S. from the PRC (not Taiwan as alleged), and
claimed her father took early retirement from the Taiwan AF and has worked as a
commercial airlines pilot for the past 15 years.  She claimed a mandatory draft in Taiwan
for all males to serve in the military and identified the government departments that
employ her two uncles in Taiwan.  She acknowledged visits to Taiwan to see her
parents, and to attend her grandmother’s funeral.  She admitted to saying “yes” to a
question posed to her about being vulnerable to pressure out of love for her parents but
claimed a misunderstanding of the implications of her answer.  And she acknowledged
receiving money from her father for a down-payment on a home purchase in the U.S. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 24-year-old electrical engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant immigrated (along with her sister) to the U.S. from Taiwan in 1998 at the
age of 15 (R.T., at 54-55).  She and her sister have since forged strong bonds together,
and attended college together (see ex. A; R.T, at 55-56).
 For the first several months of her residence in the U.S. Applicant lived with her
aunt (R.T., at 67).  She went on to complete her high school curriculum in the U.S., and
subsequently her undergraduate college studies in electrical engineering in December
2005 in a prestigious U.S. university (see exs. 1 and C; R.T., at 54).  She applied for
U.S. citizenship and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2004 (see ex 1).  Applicant
is currently pursuing graduate studies at the same university in her field of emphasis
(electrical engineering) and expects to receive her M.S degree in EE in Spring 2008
(R.T., at 54-55).
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Her mother is a
homemaker who has never worked for the Taiwan Government that Applicant can
4
personally recall.  Her father graduated from the Taiwan Air Force (AF) Academy and
joined the AF as a military pilot.  He served in the Taiwan AF between 1976 and 1991
(see ex. A; R.T., at 56-57, 74), and retired with the rank of major (R.T., at 75).  Upon his
retirement, he received a lump sum settlement of $65,000.00 (R.T., at 76).  Following his
retirement he became a commercial airline pilot, and continues to work in that capacity
(see ex. B).  Applicant’s father has no connections with the Taiwan Government, but did
accompany his parents on one occasion to visit their parents in the PRC  (see ex. A;
R.T., at 57, 77-78).
Applicant has a paternal grandfather, and three other grandparents as well as
several aunts, uncles, and cousins.  All but two of the grandparents are citizens and
residents of Taiwan (R.T., at 79-81).  The two remaining surviving grandparents reside in
the PRC (R.T., at 79-81).  Her paternal grandfather, all of her uncles, and several of her
cousins have served in the Taiwan military, which is mandatory in Taiwan (R.T., at 92-
93).  Two of her uncles currently work for the Taiwan Government.  One works for the
Taiwan post office; while the other works for a budget planning group (R.T., at 59-60,
95).  To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, her parents’ contact with their relatives
residing in the PRC is not very frequent (R.T., at 82-84).
Besides her relatives who reside in the U.S. and Taiwan, Applicant has a good
friend who resides in the U.S., while remaining a citizen of the PRC (R.T., at 61-62, 96-
99).  This friend has since applied for a green card to work in the U.S., and awaits
notification of the results.  
Upon becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant relinquished her Taiwan passport (R.T.,
at 67).  Although she never officially renounced her Taiwan citizenship, she does not
believe she has any obligations to Taiwan (R.T., at 69).  While she retains her loyalties to
her parents, her primary loyalties lie with the U.S. (R.T., at 70, 89), she does not foresee
any need to take care of them financially.  Applicant has never served in the Taiwan
military and has never been employed by the Taiwan Government (R.T., at 70-71).  
Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant made a number of trips to
Taiwan to visit her parents and other family members: specifically, in December 1999,
June 2001, May 2004, and December 2006.  She made an additional trip to Taiwan after
in August 2004 to attend her grandmother’s funeral.  While it is not clear from the record
which passports she used after she became a U.S. citizen, she assures that she turned
her Taiwan passport over to her facility clearance officer (FSO), who reportedly
destroyed it (R.T., at 103-04).  Applicant maintains regular monthly telephone contacts
with her parents (R.T., at 57, 86), but has few telephone contacts with her other relatives
residing in Taiwan (R.T., at 90-92).
Applicant has a financial advisor to help her save on buying a home in the
geographical area of her employment (R.T., at 63).  She fully supports herself and has
invested most of her savings in investment accounts (see exs. E, F and G).  She
maintains all of her financial interests in the U.S., and none in Taiwan (R.T., at 63, 102).
To be sure, she has received financial support from her father to help underwrite the
5
down payment (estimated to be $15,000.00 between November 2006 and January 2007)
on her planned purchase of a home.  She has invested this money and does not want to
liquidate her shares in this investment out of concern of taking an investment loss (R.T.,
at 63).  She expects to be able to save enough over the next two years to be able to
purchase a home, and expresses her desire to complete her graduate studies, and
continue working for her current employer (R.T., at 113-14). 
Applicant has no reason to believe any of her immediate family members residing
in Taiwan are at any risk to coercion, pressure or influence (R.T., at 105).  She has
received security training and briefing and has held an interim security clearance since
January 2006 (see ex. H).  She pledges to continue to abide by security procedures and
would report any foreign contacts or attempts to influence her to her FSO (R.T., at 61,
106).  And one potentially troublesome statement attributable to her (i.e., her July 2007
statement that she is vulnerable to pressure, coercion, or duress based on her family
members that are not citizens of the U.S.) has been thoroughly explained by Applicant
as the result of misinterpreting the question, and exercising an abundance of caution in
recognition of her continued love for her family, and is reconciled with her extensive
security training and briefing (R.T., at 58, 89).
Supervisors, co-workers and friends who have known Applicant for a number of
years attest to her honesty and trustworthiness (see ex. A; R.T. at 123, 127-28).   Both
her section manager and her mentor credit her with outstanding performance, reliability
and trustworthiness (see ex. A). 
Taiwan’s country status
Taiwan has a rich history that dates back 12 to 15 thousand years.  Dutch and
Spanish colonists claimed the island in the 16  and 17  centuries (see Background Note:th th
Taiwan, U.S. Department of State (April 2007)).  Migration from the Chinese mainland
over time supplanted the  aborigines peoples of Taiwan.  Japan exerted considerable
influence over Taiwan following China’s ceding of Taiwan to Japan in 1895 (see
Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3).
Following the end of World War II in 1945, Taiwan reverted to Chinese rule.  Civil
war erupted soon after the reversion between Chiang Kai-Shek’s KMT government and
the increasingly influential Chinese Communist Party guided by Mao Zedong.  When the
civil war ended in 1949, 2 million refugees (predominantly nationalists) fled to Taiwan,
where Chiang Kai-Shek established a separate provisional KMT capital in Taipei (see
Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3). Mao’s victorious Communist party, in turn,
established the People’ s Republic of China (PRC).
For the past one-half century, Taiwan has demonstrated steady economic
development and today is a major international trading power.  Its accession to the WTO
in 2002 represented a significant achievement and strengthened its standing in the
expanding global economy. 
6
Taiwan has exhibited steady political development as well since its establishment
as an island government. Changes reflect a continuing liberalizing process that
culminated in the tightly contested election of Chen Shui-bian in 2000 (see Background
Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3).   Chen’s DPP party won major parliamentary victories in 2000
and again in 2004, enabling Chen to become the first opposition party candidate to win
the presidency.  Chen was re-elected in 2004 on a platform that included a “defensive
referendum” (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 6).  Such referenda have been
historically perceived to be closely linked to the question of Taiwan’s independence.
Today’s Taiwan political system can appropriately be described as a multi-party
democracy  under a Constitutional umbrella comprising five branches: executive,
legislative, judicial, control and examination.  By all accounts, Taiwan has a good human
rights record and has demonstrated respect for the rule of contract in its commercial
relations.
Taiwan’s PRC relations
The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is
only “one China” (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 6).  Despite differences over
the PRC’s one China policy, Taiwan and the PRC have enjoyed increased contacts over
the past decade.  With Taiwan’s continued relaxation of its PRC policy regarding
unofficial contacts, cross-strait interactions have grown significantly.  Efforts by the PRC,
however, to resume cross-strait dialogue without any preconditions have been hampered
by the PRC’s insistence that the two sides first reach consensus that there is only “one
China” before restarting talks (see id.).  Cheng has recognized the PRC’s “one China”
insistence but to date has declined to condone the concept.  With both sides unwilling to
compromise this obstacle, they have cautiously felt each other out with smaller
intermediary steps like cross-strait cargo and passenger charter flights, sale of Taiwan
agricultural products in the PRC, and PRC tourists visiting Taiwan (see id).  
The PRC operates a large and sophisticated intelligence bureau, entitled the MSS
(see Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency
OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS), at 71 (June 2004)).  The MSS maintains active
intelligence gathering operations in Taiwan (see id., at 72).  These operations use
clandestine agents to collect intelligence on Western consortia investing in the PRC who
are suspected of involvement in attempts to democratize the PRC, as well as other pro-
democracy groups thought to be engaging in anti-communist activities (see Intelligence
Threat Handbook, supra, at 72). 
Compounding security concerns over the PRC’s robust intelligence gathering
operations in Taiwan is the PRC regime’s poor human rights record.  The State
Department reports an increased number of high profile cases in the PRC involving the
monitoring, harassment, detention, arrest, and imprisonment of journalists, writers,
activists, and defense lawyers seeking to exercise their law-protected rights (see China,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2006, U.S. Department of State (March
2007)).  The State Department cites a comprehensive, credible accounting of all those
7
killed, missing, or detained, reported incidents of deaths in custody, disappearance,
torture, and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment (see id., at 2-3).
While the PRC officially denies holding any political prisoners, Western non-government
organizations estimate that approximately 500 persons remained in prison in 2006 for the
repealed crime of counterrevolution, and thousands of others were either serving
sentences or were being detained for counter-revolutionary offenses (id., at 8).  State
Department advisories caution American citizens visiting or residing in China to take the
normal safety precautions and remain aware of their individual surroundings (see
Consular Information Sheet, U.S. Department of State, March 2007).  
In the current political environment, it is still too early to predict the direction of
cross-strait negotiations between Taiwan and the PRC.  Because of the PRC’s long
insistence on Taiwan’s acceptance of the ‘one China” principle as a requisite to any jump-
starting of negotiations over practical agreements in trade, cultural exchanges, and other
areas of mutual interest, future relations between the two sides remain cloudy at best.
U.S.-Taiwan relations
In a joint communique with the PRC in January 1979, the U.S. announced its
recognition of the government of the PRC as the sole government of China and that there
is but one China, of which Taiwan is a part (see Background Note; China, U.S.
Department of State, at 8 (January 2007).  The Joint Communique stated that within this
context the people of the U.S. will maintain cultural, commercial, and other unofficial
relations with the people of Taiwan.
To implement the Joint communique, Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act
(TRA) in April 1979.  President Carter, in turn, signed the legislation into law on April 10,
1979.  Besides providing the legal basis for maintaining the U.S. unofficial relationship
with Taiwan, the TRA reinforced the U.S. commitment to providing defense assistance to
Taiwan.  The TRA expressly provides for the continued sale of appropriate defensive
military equipment to Taiwan and declares that peace and stability in the area are in U.S.
interests (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 9).  And even though the U.S.
terminated its Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan following its de-recognition of the latter,
it has continued its sale of appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan (see id.).
While ambiguously written, the U.S. commitment to Taiwan’s security against
cross-Strait aggression by the PRC’s military forces is implicit in the TRA’s coverage of
U.S. responsibilities towards Taiwan.  This implicit construction is oft-used to support
proponents of a “two China” policy.  To be sure, initial actions of the Bush Administration
in 2001 provided cause to conclude the new President had abandoned longstanding U.S.
policy of “strategic ambiguity” in favor of a policy that placed a clearer emphasis on
Taiwan’s interests at the expense of the PRC (see Taiwan: Recent Developments and
U.S. Policy Choices, CRS Report to Congress, at 13 (October 2006)).  More recent
developments, though, reflect the smoothing of U.S.-PRC relations as a part of the
broader war on terrorism.  
8
Currently, the U.S. does not support Taiwan independence and opposes unilateral
steps by either side to alter the status quo (see Background Note; China, supra, at 20).
For so long as Taiwan’s national security remains under threat (both veiled and unveiled)
from the PRC, Taiwan can be expected to pursue the development of its military amidst
expectations of military assistance from the U.S.  Stressing self-reliance, Taiwan
maintains a large military establishment (accounting for 15.3 per cent of its central
budget).  Its principal mission is to defend itself against the PRC, which has not
renounced the use of force against Taiwan (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 8). 
With its unchanged public policy of maintaining “strategic ambiguity” in its official relations
with Taiwan, the U.S. can be expected to continue its support of Taiwan’s island security
with the sale of defensive military equipment.
Taiwan’s economic collection practices
Based on past reports to Congress, Taiwan is considered one of the most active
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  In its 2000 Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, the preparers  list
Taiwan as well as the PRC among the most active collectors based on cited surveys (see
2000 Annual Report  to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial
Espionage, National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC), at 16).  Specific incidents are
cited  in the NACIC Report that identify offenders of proprietary information thefts and
attempts to acquire export-restricted products (see id., 7-10). 
Recent espionage convictions document ongoing collection activities covering theft
of sensitive and proprietary information by and for Taiwan companies (see, e.g., 2006
Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, at 139
(November 2006); Press Release, U.S. Department of justice, U.S. Attorney (WD NY
April 2006); Press Release, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (ED VA January
2007), and Statement of Facts (stipulated),  No. 1:05CR 543 (December 2005). 
Multilateral export control regimes in place are voluntary and not universally adhered to
by member nations (see id., at 143).
Stress points between Taiwan, the PRC and the U.S.
In its November 2006 Report to Congress, the Security Review Commission
describes the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and exploiting the knowledge
developed by multiples of collection agents: legally, if possible, and otherwise illegally by
espionage (see 2006 Report to Congress, supra, at 138.  The PRC’s concerted efforts to
acquire sensitive technology poses a considerable challenge to U.S. counterintelligence
measures.  Recent indictments of Chinese citizens for espionage have served to highlight
the PRC’s spying activities in the U.S. (see id.).  Violating  its own 2004 U.S.-China
agreement, the PRC oft-fails to schedule timely end-use inspection visits of dual-use
items licensed for export to the PRC.  Better export controls can be effective only if they
are multilateral in scope (see id.).  Multilateral export controls and arms embargoes,
however, do  provide additional insurance against altering the cross-strait military balance
that has been long maintained (see id., at 144).
9
Without effective dual use export controls in place, the PRC can be expected to
acquire dual use technologies with military potential from the U.S. and Taiwan through the
U.S. and other source countries.  Reported intelligence, though, is lacking on any Taiwan
use of its collection resources in the U.S. to supply the PRC with needed military
technology (alone or through technology with known dual use capabilities).
Other stress points between the PRC and Taiwan are reflected in periodic PRC
military exercises in the Taiwan Straits (see Background Note: China, supra, at 19).  More
frequent U.S.-PRC high-level exchanges have the potential to reduce cross-strait military
tensions (id., at 19).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.”
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
10
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
ANALYSIS
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who immigrated to the U.S. from Taiwan in
1998 to further her education pursuits.  Security issues of concern to the Government
focus on members of Applicant’s immediate family (i.e., her parents, paternal grandfather)
and extended family members who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, a country
historically friendly to the U.S., albeit, one with a reported history of economic collection
activities in the U.S.
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s parents,
paternal grandfather, and other family members residing in Taiwan, might be subject to
undue foreign influence by Taiwanese government authorities to access classified
information in Applicant’s possession or control.  Because Applicant’s immediate and
extended family members reside in Taiwan, they present potential heightened security
risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication Guidelines for
foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of these immediate and non-immediate
family members in Taiwan pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the
risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information
under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
11
Because Applicant’s father, paternal grandfather, uncles and cousins residents all
have prior military service (although aged for the most part), some consideration of DC
7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” is warranted as well.  Applicant’s contacts with her
parents and other family members residing in Taiwan afford her some potential for
accessing Taiwan officials who might be interested in proprietary, sensitive, or even
classified information that Applicant is privy to.  Still, none of Applicant’s family members
have any identified affiliations or contacts with Taiwan officials currently known to be
associated with intelligence or military organizations interested in collecting proprietary or
sensitive information in the U.S.
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s
immediate family residing in Taiwan have any political affiliations with Taiwan’s
government, have any history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or
appear to be vulnerable to the same.  Applicant’s father is a graduate of Taiwan’s
prestigious AF Academy, and served for many years in Taiwan’s AF, but has had no
connection with the Taiwan government or military since his retirement in 1991.  Also, two
of her uncles hold low level positions with Taiwan government agencies.  None of these
recited positions, however, involve intelligence or military operations and, as such, are not
likely to make any of these relatives foreseeable subjects of interest to Taiwan foreign
data collection officials. Upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about her
immediate family and extended family members, any risk of undue foreign influence on
Applicant and/or her parents, paternal grandparents, and extended family members would
appear to be insubstantial, and clearly not of the magnitude that could make them subject
to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under Guideline B.
Taiwan, although a country reported to have targeted U.S. economic and
proprietary interests in the past, enjoys a special relationship with the U.S. through the
TRA, and is a democratic government with a history of respect for human rights and the
rule of law.  While Taiwan has been a reported active collector of economic intelligence in
the U.S., it has not been known to use acquired information to harm U.S. strategic
interests.  Taiwan remains a member in good standing with the WTO, and a constructive
trading partner with the U.S., who at times has itself been targeted by agents of the PRC
for intelligence collection on Western groups thought to be promoting democracy and
engaging in anti-communist activities directed at the PRC.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are
citizens/residents of foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable
risk in one foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by
practical necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Taiwan. 
12
The special relationship that has existed between the U.S. and Taiwan over the
past half-century has been one marked by mutually reconcilable political and economic
interests. Reports of Taiwan intelligence gathering against U.S. companies are
counterbalanced by Taiwan’s history of friendship and partnership in a defense pact
formalized in 1979.  The mutually supportive bonds that have linked Taiwan’s special
relationship with the U.S. have not been weakened by either the TRA, or the  geopolitical
forces that have shaped the U.S.’s evolving relationship with the PRC.  Whatever
potential heightened security risks arise as the result of Applicant's having family
members with citizenship and residency in Taiwan are by every reasonable measure
mitigated.  
Taiwan remains a friend of the U.S. and is a country whose democratic institutions
are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for human rights and the rule of
law.  Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, the new ones do take account of the covered
country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging
whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a
heightened security risk.  The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter.  Taiwan, while reported to target the U.S. and its companies in
the past for economic and proprietary information, is still a country with no known recent
history of hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence against family
members to obtain either classified information, or unclassified economic and proprietary
data. 
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's immediate
and extended family members in Taiwan  (a country whose interests have recently been
and continue to be friendly to those of the U.S.), any potential heightened risk of a
hostage situation or undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either
classified information or economic or proprietary data out of Applicant through her family
members residing in Taiwan is an acceptable one.  Applicant, accordingly, may take
advantage of one important mitigating condition: MC 8(a), “the nature of the relationships
with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the persons or
activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S..” 
MC (8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or
the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest” has application, too, to Applicant’s situation.  Both at home and through those in
senior positions with Applicant’s employer, W has demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and
professional commitments to the U.S. since becoming Applicant’s spouse in 2002, and a
naturalized citizen in 2006.  Whatever potential conflicts she may have through her dual
Taiwan citizenship and contacts with her family members in Taiwan have been more than
counterbalanced by her demonstrated U.S. citizenship responsibilities.  
13
Whole person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflict
of interests with her Taiwan family members. Not only has Applicant become a
naturalized U.S. citizen and received her education (both high school and college) in the
U.S., but she has made every efforts to work, save, and pursue her financial interests
exclusively in the U.S. (albeit with some prior financial help from her father).  Applicant is
highly regarded and trusted by her supervisor and co-workers and is not aware of any
risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of her family members might be exposed
to.  Under these recounted circumstances, any likelihood of any coercion, pressure, or
influence being brought to bear on any of her family members would appear to be minimal
at this time.   Put another way, Applicant has no visible conflicts of interest with Taiwan
citizen/residents or property interests in Taiwan that could be at risk to exploitation or
compromise by Taiwan military or intelligence officials.  
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's family members
in Taiwan are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's
ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to her familial relationships in
Taiwan.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
Guideline B.
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.k:: FOR APPLICANT
 CONCLUSIONS
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
