 
1 
 
 
                                                            
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-04377 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John E. Tuthill, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On April 20, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-
QIP). On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
G (Alcohol Consumption), to Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 26, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On January 25, 2008, DOHA assigned the case 
 
2 
 
 
to me. A Notice of Hearing issued on March 3, 2008, and the case was heard on March 
20, 2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called five witnesses, and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through I into evidence without objection.  DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on March 31, 2008.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c of the SOR, and offered explanations in support of his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He is a senior staff chemical engineer for a federal 
contractor for whom he has worked since May 1981. As a senior member of the staff, 
Applicant oversees many projects for the company.  He is married and has three adult 
sons, one of whom lives at home.  In May 1993, he earned a Master of Science in 
Mechanical Engineering. Over the course of his employment, he received training in 
handling and storing classified information. (GE 2). He has held a Secret security 
clearance for 26 years. (Tr. 72).   
 
 In the summer of 1990, Applicant began experiencing chronic joint and back 
pain. ln 1995, he was diagnosed with fibromyalgia. His doctor prescribed various 
medications for his condition, including anti-inflammatory agents and specific anti-
depressant drugs over the next several years. The medications were initially effective 
for periods of time, but eventually lost their efficacy. In early 2004, he began self-
medicating with alcohol on a regular basis to relieve the pain. (Tr. 74).  
 
 In the fall of 2006, Applicant developed severe sciatica pain. When he met with a 
government investigator for his security clearance interview in November 2006, he 
stated he had increased his evening alcohol consumption to approximately six to ten 
beers each night over the course of several hours in order to manage his pain. (GE 3; 
Tr. 76; 78; 87). Although he admitted in his Answer that he occasionally drank to excess 
or became mildly intoxicated, he does not believe he engaged in binge drinking or 
became intoxicated to the point of having impaired judgment while drinking at home. He 
never placed himself in a position where his judgment could be a concern. (Answer; Tr. 
76; 77). 
 
 During the first half of 2007, Applicant started attending physical therapy to 
relieve the sciatica pain. After working with the physical therapist and doing exercises at 
home for a period of time, the sciatica pain began to mitigate, as did the fibromyalgia 
pain. By April and May of 2007, he moderated his alcohol consumption to two or three 
beers a couple nights a week at home. (Tr. 89). He continued the therapy sessions until 
December 2007, when his insurance benefits ran out for that year.   
 
 After learning from a governmental investigator in June 2007 that his alcohol 
consumption was jeopardizing his security clearance, Applicant immediately stopped 
 
3 
 
 
drinking and sought an independent alcohol and substance abuse evaluation, as 
recommended by the investigator. (Tr. 62). On July 16, 2007, he met with a licensed 
social worker, certified in drug counseling, for an evaluation. After completing an alcohol 
and drug assessment, the counselor sent a report to the government investigator on 
July 31, 2008. He diagnosed Applicant as having an alcohol abuse disorder. (GE 4). He 
recommended that Applicant participate in outpatient treatment, including individual 
counseling, alcohol education, and seek help at a pain management clinic. He 
recommended Applicant abstain from alcohol use. (Id.). Applicant did not receive a copy 
of that report until October 2, 2007, despite repeated calls to the counselor’s clinic. 
 
 After meeting with the government investigator in June 2007, Applicant did not 
consume alcohol until his birthday in September 2007, when he had a couple beers with 
his family at home. (Tr. 61). Over the past nine months he has had about 12 drinks, and 
completely stopped consuming alcohol on December 6, 2007. He is very aware of the 
diagnosis he received from two health care providers and is committed to maintaining 
abstinence. (Tr. 60; 83-84; 90). Currently, he controls his pain through exercises and 
anti-inflammatory drugs.   
 
 Over the course of the years that Applicant was drinking, he was never arrested 
for any alcohol related incidents, disorderly conduct, or intoxication. He generally never 
drank outside of his home, unless he had a glass of wine with friends while socializing. 
(Tr. 61-61; 78-81).  He never went to work under the influence of alcohol, or received 
any type of disciplinary action related to alcohol consumption. None of his colleagues 
ever observed him intoxicated.    
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor testified.  He has a Top-Secret security clearance. 
He has known Applicant for four and a half years and been his supervisor since 
September 2007. He interacts with Applicant on a daily basis. He has never observed 
Applicant under the influence of alcohol at work or during social events they attended. 
He rated Applicant as “exceptional” in the 2007 annual performance evaluation, which 
included information and comments from other employees. (AE F). He supports 
Applicant’s request for a Top-Secret security clearance. (Tr. 16-22). 
 
 Another colleague of Applicant testified. He has held a Secret clearance for 20 
years. He has known Applicant for 25 years and supervised him for four years, giving 
him an “excellent” rating each year. Although they interacted socially on occasion years 
ago, their relationship has essentially been of a professional nature. He has never 
observed Applicant under the influence of alcohol or medication. He initiated Applicant’s 
request for a Top-Secret security clearance.  He does not have any reservations or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or ability to handle 
classified information. (Tr. 23-29). Several other colleagues have similar opinions of 
Applicant and those opinions were considered in his previous evaluations. (AE H). 
 
 One of Applicant’s friends testified telephonically. He has a Ph.D. in laboratory 
medicine and pathology. He has known Applicant for more than 40 years. He is aware 
of Applicant’s struggle with sciatica pain and fibromyalgia, and the issues surrounding 
 
4 
 
 
the security clearance hearing. He has never observed Applicant abusing alcohol, 
although he has detected that Applicant had been consuming alcohol during an 
occasional telephone conversation over the past couple years. Applicant never 
discussed his work with him. The last time he saw Applicant was in December 2007. 
(Tr. 31-43). He considers him to be a good father, husband, friend, and dedicated 
employee. 
 Three of Applicant’s colleagues submitted letters in support of Applicant, 
attesting to his reliability, integrity and trustworthiness. One of them strongly 
recommends his application for a Top-Secret security clearance. (AE B, D and E).  
 
 A clinical psychologist, who interviewed Applicant twice in January 2008, 
testified. He has been licensed since 1986 and began working in private practice in 
1988. He has extensive clinical experience, covering a broad range of psychological 
issues. Over the course of his practice, he has performed many substance abuse 
evaluations for clients, including Applicant, who voluntarily came to him for a second 
opinion. As part of his evaluation, he administered two psychological assessment tests 
to Applicant: the Substance Abuse Subtle Screening Inventory Test and Michigan 
Alcohol Screening Tool. He also reviewed the July 2007 alcohol and drug assessment 
report from the previous health care provider, and numerous documents written by 
Applicant in response to the Government’s security concerns, as well as his medical 
records.  
 
 Based on his interview, the assessment tests and a review of various documents, 
the psychologist concluded that Applicant possessed an “Alcohol Abuse Disorder, In 
Early Partial Remission and of mild to moderate severity.” (AE A; Tr. 98). Applicant 
acknowledged that his alcohol consumption predisposed him to medical problems and 
potential employment issues. The psychologist recommended that Applicant abstain 
from all alcoholic beverages. In early March 2008, the psychologist again met with 
Applicant, who informed him that he had remained abstinent for two and a half months. 
The psychologist opined that if the Applicant has abstained for that period of time, “he 
has a good prognosis to be able to maintain sobriety without formal intervention or 
treatment.” (AE A at 2). He believes that “historically [Applicant’s] use of alcohol has 
primarily been social, and then in the last few years, his dinking increased as he started 
to use that as a treatment for his fibromyalgia.” (Tr. 104). He does not have any 
reservations about Applicant’s ability to perform his job competently or professionally. 
(Tr. 91-104).  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified. They have been married 30 years and have three adult 
children. For the last nine years, she has worked outside of the home. She is very 
aware of her husband’s physical problems and the various treatments and medications 
he has used to treat them, including the consumption of alcohol. His consumption of 
beer increased in the fall of 2006 when the sciatica pain became more prominent. She 
does not believe he has an alcohol problem and has observed him cease drinking for 
periods of time. He generally never drank outside of the home. He has not consumed 
alcohol since December 2007. He currently manages his pain with physical therapy, 
 
5 
 
 
exercise and vitamins. He may make an appointment at a pain clinic for additional 
assistance.  (Tr. 40-54). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
Based on the evidence, the Government established a disqualifying condition 
under AG ¶ 22(d), which is applicable when there is evidence of “a diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.”  On March 17, 2008, a clinical psychologist 
diagnosed Applicant as having an Alcohol Abuse Disorder, in Early Partial Remission. 
Although the Government argued that the evidence also raised a disqualification under 
AG ¶ 22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent,” I do not agree.  Applicant and his wife deny that he became intoxicated to 
the point of having impaired judgment while he drank at home at night. Furthermore, I 
do not believe the Government intended that this disqualification be directed to 
individuals who consume alcohol, alone, in the privacy of their home, and do not break 
any laws or violate established standards of conduct. 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions are potentially applicable under AG ¶¶ 
23 (a)-(d): 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
 
7 
 
 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
Applicant credibly acknowledges his issues of alcohol abuse. Over the past nine 
months, he consumed about 12 drinks, and since December 7, 2008, he has not 
consumed any alcohol. He has successfully addressed his pain problems through 
physical therapy and anti-inflammatory drugs. He is committed to abstinence and a 
healthy life style. He has recently considered making an appointment at a pain 
management clinic. All of those actions are sufficient to trigger the application of AG ¶ 
23(b).  There is some evidence to support a limited application of AG ¶ 23(c), in that he 
received a favorable prognosis from the evaluating clinical psychologist, based on his 
past months of sobriety. None of the other two mitigating conditions apply.   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following: (1) the 
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 53-year-old man, who 
has worked for his employer for more than 27 years and received exceptional ratings for 
several years. He has held a Secret security clearance for 26 years without any 
reported incidents of mishandling classified information. His current and former 
supervisors consider him to be a very reliable, trustworthy and valued employee. They 
support his request for a Top-Secret security clearance, as do other colleagues.  Over 
the past years, none of his witnesses observed Applicant to be intoxicated or exhibiting 
impaired judgment, in spite of his painful condition.   
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant is an intelligent 
and successful individual, who imprudently began consuming alcohol at night as a 
means to manage excruciating pain. He has since learned to manage his pain through a 
change in his life style and without alcohol. Given his commitment to change and 
 
8 
 
 
abstinence, coupled with a lack of any other adverse evidence in his background, I do 
not believe he poses a security risk. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under alcohol consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
