1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )
SSN: ---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-05146
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
On October 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary
decision to deny his application for a security clearance. The SOR cited security
concerns under Guidelines M (misuse of information technology) and Guideline E
(personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant timely responded to the SOR, admitting all of the allegations therein,
and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2008, and I
scheduled a hearing to be held on April 1, 2008. The parties appeared as scheduled.
The government presented seven exhibits (GE. 1 - 7). Applicant testified, offered 44
exhibits (AE. A - OO), and presented six witnesses. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.)
2
on April 10, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline M, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant was
counseled in May 2004 for viewing, downloading and/or sending pornography on his
government computer and/or government networks system. In SOR ¶ 1.b, the
government alleged Applicant was investigated by the Office of the Inspector General
on December 22, 2004, concerning continued misuse of government equipment and
communications systems; that the investigation revealed that Applicant had viewed,
downloaded and/or sent pornography depicting nude women and adults engaged in
sexually explicit acts on his government computer and/or government networks system;
that Applicant received a formal letter of reprimand with a two-year probation condition
that any future infractions will be termination for cause; and that an adverse report was
filed on June 6, 2005. 
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a the same information
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s admissions are entered as facts. After a thorough
review of the record, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 51 years old. Since November 2000, he has worked as a systems
analyst for a defense contractor. He has held a top secret clearance in the military and
in his civilian career. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) from 1977 until
December 2000 (Tr. 129). He is married with no children.
Applicant works as part of a team to support the Navy-Marine Corps Intranet
(NMCI). He works with other government employees and contractors. He is the contract
technical representative who provides technical support to the Director, NMCI. He is
also the assistant security officer. His clearance affords him access to government
facilities and national security information (GE 1).
In 2003, Applicant received joke emails on his government computer from high
ranking officials and service personnel that contained inappropriate material. The emails
included photographs and videos of nude women. He forwarded these emails to a
group of friends and other Marines in his address book. He admitted that he viewed and
downloaded the pornographic images (depicting nude women and adults engaged in
sexually explicit acts) in violation of policy, contract and regulations. In May 2004,
Applicant was counseled by his employer to discontinue the use (GE 2). However, he
continued the practice when he received more emails in the following months (Tr. 135).
When Applicant spoke to one of his supervisors about the emails in 2004, his supervisor
joked and told him not to do it again (Tr 137). 
In March 2005, Applicant received a phone call from an investigator in the
Inspector Generals Office (IG). The Applicant answered questions concerning the
inappropriate email use on the computer at work. After the telephone conversation,
Applicant reported to his supervisor. He told him about the phone call and his
admissions concerning the inappropriate emails that he forwarded and his visits to
3
pornographic sites. After the investigation, a Report of Adverse Information was issued
on June 1, 2005. (GE 1). 
Applicant voluntarily sought counseling after his conversation with the IG office.
He was concerned about any problems that he might have. He saw a military
psychologist and psychiatrist at a naval hospital (AE NN). He also enrolled in an “Ethics
in Cyberspace” course. After numerous counseling visits, Applicant received no
diagnosis of any kind and no treatment or medications were prescribed (Tr 146). 
At the hearing, Applicant explained he had not received security training about
accessing unauthorized web sites. He acknowledged that he did sign Employee
Handbook but did not read it. He realizes that is ono excuse for his behavior.
Applicant told his wife about the investigation and his use of the computer to visit
and download pornographic sites. He had conversations with management and
government personnel. He received a formal letter of reprimand and was put on a two-
year probation with the written condition that any future infractions will result in
immediate termination for cause (GE 1 at 2). He successfully completed his probation in
2007.
Applicant has rearranged his office. His computer is now in full sight so that the
monitor is visible to all persons passing his door. He admits that he misused his NMCI
technology system. His behavior in downloading pornographic material from the internet
could put the intranet system in danger. He admits his judgment was poor, despite the
fact that he was receiving the emails from other government personnel. Applicant did
not really think that forwarding the emails was inappropriate since others in the
company were sending the joke emails. He also was shown the pornographic sites by
some of the personnel in company. He was adamant when testifying that he now knows
it was inappropriate conduct and could jeopardize the security system. He was credible
in his testimony that he would never repeat such conduct. 
Applicant’s work record with the defense contractor since November 2000 is
exemplary in every respect. Several government, military, and company associates and
superiors have lauded his superior efforts and expertise. His performance before and
after the incident with the computer is flawless. He is competent and professional. His
coworkers applaud him as a man of character. He continues to have access to sensitive
privacy-act protected information. At the hearing, his supervisors and colleagues
repeatedly praised him as having an impeccable work ethic; strong character,
dependable, reliable, honest, trustworthy and willing to maintain policies established
within the organization. (AE OO). His military record is replete with awards and
commendations (AE A-LL). Each witness praised Applicant for his competence and
integrity. In 2007, Applicant received another commendation from his employer for
exemplary service (AE F).
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
 Directive. 6.3.1
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are:(1) The nature, extent, and2
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.4
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).5
4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors1
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or2
mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under Guideline M (misuse of information technology systems), at
AG ¶ 39, and Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to3
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a4
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.5
Analysis
Misuse of Information Technology Systems.
Under Guideline M, “[n]oncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or
regulations pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness
5
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. Information
Technology Systems include all related  computer hardware, software, firmware, and
data used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or
protection of information.” (AG ¶ 39). The government presented sufficient information
to support the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.b. Further, the information presented
requires application of the disqualifying condition listed at AG ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use
of a government or other information technology system).
In response to the SOR, Applicant has admitted his misuse of his government
computer when he forwarded emails that contained nude photos of women, and when
he visited and downloaded pornographic sites from at least 2003 until 2005. 
The record supports consideration of the Guideline M mitigating conditions listed
in AG ¶ 41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). This conduct was not
recent. His last misuse was in 2005. Applicant has demonstrated through successful
completion of his two-year probation and no further violations that his actions do not
reflect adversely on his “reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 41(a))
Indeed, his actions show a willingness to gain psychiatric help and counseling to assure
himself and the government that there was no other problem. He has received
commendations since the incidents. His employer has recommended that he remain in
his position. He has been open and honest with all involved. He is remorseful. He has
taken a course on ethics. He is committed to his work and does not want to let his
employer down. Any future transgressions will result in his termination.
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in the
AG ¶ 15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
Applicant may not be disqualified under Guideline E for the SOR ¶ 2.a allegation. The
record shows that conduct is specifically covered under Guideline M and must be
addressed according to AG ¶ 40(b), as discussed above.
However, even considering a personal conduct disqualification under Guideline
E, Applicant has presented evidence of mitigation. Under Personal Conduct Mitigating
Condition ¶17 (d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) Applicant has met his
burden by taking the steps and actions that are discussed under Guideline M.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines M and E. I have also
 See footnote 5, supra.6
6
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is a mature adult whose recent job performance has been exemplary.6
He has maintained a security clearance for many years. His military record is replete
with awards. He was open and honest about the joke emails that he received. At first,
he did not realize the import of such emails, but he does not use that as an excuse. He
took responsibility for his conduct, and he volunteered to seek counselling from the
military psychiatrist and psychologist. His employer trusts him to maintain his assistant
security position.  He has rearranged his office computer so that anyone can see the
display monitor anytime they pass his door. He was cooperative with his investigators.
The record of behavioral change and rehabilitation is sufficient to show he is unlikely to
repeat his conduct in the future. The record is sufficient to overcome the adverse
information about Applicant’s conduct.  Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
under misuse of technology and personal conduct.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
                                                    
NOREEN A LYNCH
Administrative Judge
