 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04740 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 1, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 14, 2008, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on April 10, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 
22, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11. Applicant did not object to 
GE 1 through 6 and 8 through 11, and they were admitted. Applicant objected to GE 7, 
which is a police report of an alleged sexual assault by Applicant. He objected to the 
admission of the report because it contained a “malicious complaint” by the complainant 
and he is denied the right to confront her. I withheld ruling on the exhibit. The Appeal 
Board has addressed this issue and held that a police report was admissible over an 
applicant’s objection, stating “the DOHA process encourages Judges to err on the side 
of initially admitting evidence into the record and then to consider a party’s objections 
when deciding what, if any, weight to give to that evidence.”1 Applicant’s objection is 
overruled and GE 7 is admitted. I will consider Applicant’s objection when determining 
the weight to give the document. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a high school 
graduate. He has never been married and has no children.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested for possession of a controlled substance in 1995 and 
1997. In 1998, he was arrested for unlawful delivery of a controlled substance. All of the 
charges were dismissed or otherwise disposed without going to trial. Applicant admitted 
to the arrests but denied all the charges. He stated he has never used illegal drugs but 
he had friends that did. Applicant described what led to the arrests in a statement 
provided for his background investigation on September 18. 2007. He stated the first 
arrest was for what the police believed were marijuana plants, except that the plants 
were not marijuana. The second case involved the police searching Applicant’s car. He 
stated a friend was with him and the friend dropped his cocaine on the floor of the car 
when the police arrived. The police arrested everybody in the car. Applicant denied 
knowing that his friend had drugs. He stated the charge was dismissed because it was 
an unlawful search. He stated the third arrest occurred because someone kept asking 
Applicant to sell him drugs. He wrote that after several months of asking, Applicant sold 
him tree sap for $40, telling him it was opium. He was arrested for the sale, but the 
material tested negative for controlled substances, and the charge was dismissed.3 
 
 In July 2004, Applicant and a friend took two pieces of equipment from the rear of 
a business. He described the incident as “dumpster diving” and the items as two broken 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 04-12449 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2007). 
 
2 Tr. at 23, 27; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-23; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 3-5. 
 
 
3 
 
lasers which were in a scrap pile to be discarded. The police were called and stopped 
the car after it left the area. The owner of the business asked for the property to be 
returned. Applicant and his friend returned the items and the police let them go without 
an arrest or charges.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2004, and charged with (1) driving under the 
influence (DUI); (2) driving with a blood alcohol level of 0.08 or more; (3) hit and run 
driving causing property damage; and (4) unlawful left turn on divided highway. 
Applicant was driving after drinking and struck two parked cars. The accident had 
apparently caused his car to turn around. The car was damaged but operable. He then 
drove off southbound in the northbound traffic lanes. He drove to an intersection where 
he was able to turn into the correct lane. A police officer was driving by shortly after the 
accident occurred. He observed a cloud of dust, Applicant’s car facing the wrong way, 
and Applicant’s car driving away. The officer caught up to Applicant’s car and paced it 
for less than a tenth of a mile, noting that Applicant was driving about 50 miles per hour 
in a 35 zone. He stopped the car, initiated a field sobriety test, and placed Applicant 
under arrest. Applicant requested a blood test, which indicated a blood alcohol level of 
.170%. In December 2004, Applicant pled guilty to counts (2), (3), and (4). Count (1) 
was dismissed. He was sentenced to serve ten days incarcerated to be served in the 
weekend work program; probation for three years; ordered to complete a first offender 
alcohol program; his license was restricted for 90 days; and he was ordered to pay 
approximately $1,500 in fines and fees. Applicant admitted to the arrest and conviction. 
In his September 18, 2007 statement, he wrote that he “drove about 50 more feet after 
the accident.” He testified that he did not really agree with the hit and run part of the 
charges, because his car was “just a few feet down the road,” but “that’s what they 
wanted to call it.”5  
 
 A girlfriend of one of Applicant’s friends filed a police report in August 2005, 
stating that Applicant had sexually assaulted her in May 2005. The following is a 
summary of her report. She met Applicant in about March 2005 at a hacking seminar 
and he introduced her to her boyfriend, who had been friends with Applicant since high 
school. After being out at a show together, the three went to Applicant’s residence at 
about 2:00 in the morning. Applicant’s roommate said they were making too much noise 
and asked them to move into Applicant’s bedroom. At about 3:45 Applicant asked her if 
she wanted to take a powder he called “2CB.” She stated that Applicant also had 
psilocybin mushrooms and cocaine in his possession. She took the powder and “passed 
out completely” shortly thereafter. Over the next six hours she regained consciousness 
intermittently only to lapse back into unconsciousness. During the times she regained 
consciousness, she remembered seeing Applicant with his mouth on her exposed neck 
and breasts and him rubbing his fully clothed body against her. She discussed the 
incident with her boyfriend the next day. He was also on the bed and saw what she 
described. He prevented Applicant from removing any more of her clothing and from 
touching her below the waist. He told her that he did not stop it because he thought that 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 25; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3, 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 25-26; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4, 8-11. 
 
 
4 
 
she and Applicant may also have been dating. She decided to report the incident when 
all three of them were in a hotel room at a conference they were attending and 
Applicant again attempted to fondle her breasts through her clothing as she was lying 
on a bed. Her boyfriend walked into the room as this occurred. This incident was 
several weeks before she filed the police report. Several months later, she told the 
police that she did not want Applicant prosecuted and she refused to cooperate further 
in their investigation. The case was closed.6 
 
 Applicant admitted that he was in bed with the girl and his friend, and that he 
touched her breast, but he stated it was fully consensual. He stated that she placed his 
hand on her breast. He denied that he offered her a drug or that he had any drugs at his 
house. He stated that she became very mad at him about three months later when he 
complained about her driving and she thereafter filed the false report.7 
 
 A one-page report dated September 2006, from the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation was submitted as GE 2. It listed Applicant’s full name, date of birth (DOB), 
and social security number. It stated: 
 
FBI [city] files contain reference to [Applicant], aka “[nickname],” DOB: 
[Applicant’s DOB], which contain allegations that he is a computer hacker 
who has gained unauthorized access to computer systems located in [----- 
-----] Library System (--LS) in [state], as well as to the computer system of 
a private company resulting in monetary damages. Additional allegations 
were that [Applicant] and others used computers at [--]LS to gain access 
to computers at the [state] Secretary of State’s Office. These entities 
confirmed that computer intrusions had in fact occurred. The allegations 
were made by a subject of a computer intrusion case as well as a system 
administrator for one of the systems affected. The files do not reflect that 
[Applicant] was ever charged with a crime as a result of the allegations.8 
 
The report notes at the bottom as standard language that “[t]his document contains 
neither recommendations nor conclusions of the FBI.”9 
 
 Applicant denied ever illegally hacking into any system and specifically denied 
hacking into the Library System and Secretary of State’s Office, as alleged in the FBI 
report and in the SOR. Applicant described himself as an “ethical hacker.” He admitted 
that he has used the nickname listed as the aka in the FBI report. His job is to hack into 
the Government’s computer systems with the Government’s permission to test their 
                                                          
6 GE 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 24, 26; GE 3. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Id. 
 
 
5 
 
security. He also does volunteer work and has hacked into friend’s systems with their 
permission.10  
 
Applicant’s performance appraisals have been excellent. One appraisal 
commended him for keeping abreast of industry developments, new hacker techniques, 
and the latest tools to mitigate risks, and noted him as an expert in those areas. The 
Government has recognized him for his “outstanding contribution in Information 
Security” at the Government facility.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 19, 27-30; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3. 
 
11 AE A-C. 
 
 
6 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 30 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant was arrested on three occasions on drug-related charges. He was 
convicted of driving with his blood alcohol over the limit and hit and run. He was a 
suspect in a sexual assault case and was stopped by the police after taking equipment 
from the rear of a company. Applicant denied all the criminal conduct with the exception 
of driving over the limit. I find there is insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant 
committed any of the specific criminal acts other than the conviction for driving over the 
limit and hit and run. The driving over the limit and hit and run conviction establishes AG 
¶ 30(a) and (c) as security concerns. 
 
Four Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant was pressured or coerced into committing his 
criminal acts. AG ¶ 32(b) is not applicable. He admitted committing the DUI and denied 
the remaining allegations. His denials are some evidence that he did not commit the 
offenses. AG ¶ 32(c) is applicable to all the allegations except SOR ¶ 1.e. The DUI and 
hit and run occurred in August 2004, more than three and a half years ago. He has not 
been arrested since then and he is well regarded by his employer and its Government 
client. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) have been raised for consideration. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 Applicant denied committing the acts alleged in the SOR. The only evidence 
submitted was a one-paragraph report from the FBI which references allegations made 
by a subject of a computer intrusion case and a system administrator for one of the 
systems affected. I find that this report is insufficient evidence for the Government to 
satisfy their burden to present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR. The allegations under Guideline M are concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In August 2004, Applicant was 
intoxicated, drove anyway, and hit two cars. He left the scene of the accident but he 
was quickly arrested by a police officer. I am concerned that he has not been totally 
candid about or truly accepted responsibility for the hit and run. He testified that he was 
“just a few feet down the road,” when that is clearly counter to the eye witness police 
report and to the offense to which he pled guilty. I am also concerned about the 
prevalence of drug-related incidents in his life. He was arrested three times on drug 
charges. The alleged victim of the sexual assault also stated that Applicant had drugs. 
He admitted he had friends that used drugs and that he was driving the car when drugs 
were found by the police officer. He also admitted that he sold a substance that he told 
the buyer was an illegal drug. That is at the minimum extremely poor judgment. 
Applicant has the burden of proving that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant him a security clearance. He has consistently put himself in high risk situations 
where he was at the wrong place, at the wrong time, with the wrong people. Until he is 
totally candid and can disassociate himself from those situations and people, I cannot 
find that he has met his burden of persuasion. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
