  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-08740
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on September 28, 2007. The SOR is
equivalent to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action.
The issues in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a
history of financial problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided
against Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 21, 2007, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on January 8, 2008. The hearing took place as scheduled on
March 11, 2008, and the transcript (Tr.) was received on March 19, 2008.
The record was left open until March 28, 2008, to provide Applicant an
opportunity to present documentary evidence (Tr. 75–81). No such matters were
received. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts (¶ 1.a–¶ 1.l) ranging
from $43 to $7,326 for about $17,000 in total. He admitted all the debts, except ¶ 1.c, in
his response to the SOR. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts
are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 30-year-old field logistician for a company engaged in defense
contracting. He has worked for this company since about June 2006, when he was
discharged from the Army. He served about ten years as a unit supply specialist until he
was discharged due to disability (back problems). He received an honorable discharge. 
His annual salary is about $62,000, a little less now because he is no longer
working at a remote location where he earned a higher salary. He is not married and
has no children. It appears his financial problems started when he was in the Army and
carried over to the present. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented (Exhibits 2, 3, 4, and
5). For example, a July 2006 credit report shows more than a dozen accounts listed in
the trade section as having some sort of adverse information (e.g., past due, bad debt
placed for collection, assigned to attorney/collection agency, etc.) (Exhibit 3). Likewise,
the report has 11 accounts listed in the collections section. Two credit reports from 2007
further confirm Applicant’s financial problems (Exhibits 4 and 5). 
The delinquent debts in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions and
the admitted documentary evidence. With one exception noted below, he has not paid,
 See Applicant’s testimony at Tr. 33–47.3
3
settled, or resolved any of the debts in the SOR. The status of his delinquent debts, as
alleged in the SOR, is summarized in the following table.3
Debt Description Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–collection account for $450. Disputes amount owed; provided no
documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.b–collection account for $1,397. Claims waiting for proposed settlement
letter; provided no documentary
evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.c–charged-off account for $446. Denies. Same creditor as SOR ¶ 1.i. 
Claims one account is paid and the other
does not exist; provided no documentary
evidence. 
SOR ¶ 1.d–charged-off account for $859. Claims he paid it; provided no
documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.e–collection account for $359. Claims he paid it; provided no
documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.f–charged-off account for
$4,118.
Claims he is paying $270 monthly;
provided no documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.g–charged-off account for $576. Disputes liability; provided no
documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.h–charged-off account for
$7,326 stemming from auto
repossession.
Claims waiting for proposed settlement
letter; provided no documentary
evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.i–charged-off account for $253. Same creditor as SOR ¶ 1.c.
SOR ¶ 1.j–collection account for $43. Unpaid. Claims tried to pay it, but
unsuccessful; provided no documentary
evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.k–delinquent account for $1,379
stemming from auto repossession.
Claims tried to pay it, but unsuccessful;
provided no documentary evidence.
SOR ¶ 1.l–collection account for $111. Paid off with $119 payment in Sep. 2007
(Exhibit 2 at p. 6). 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
4
In June 2006, in connection with his discharge, the Army paid Applicant $40,368
for disability severance pay (Exhibit 2–DD Form 214). He believes he received about
$30,000 after deductions. He was unable to provide a reasonable, detailed  explanation
accounting for the $30,000 (Tr. 66-72).  
He estimates having about $2,300 in a checking account and about $5,000 in a
savings account (Tr. 57). In addition, he estimates having about $16,500 in a 401(k)
account (Tr. 72). He did not provide documentary evidence to support his estimates. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any6
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order7
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting8
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An9
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate10
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating15
conditions under Guideline F). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 16
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 17
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 18
5
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically15
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be16
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations17 18
within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more than sufficient to
establish these two disqualifying conditions. It appears Applicant has lived beyond his
 MC 4 is “ the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”19
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.32.1 (scope of appellate review for findings of fact). 20
 Examples of other large bureaucratic institutions that rely heavily on documentation include banks,21
insurance companies, hospitals, universities, and the Armed Forces. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 22
6
means, has been financially irresponsible, or is simply uninterested in addressing his
past delinquent debts or a combination thereof. These circumstances do not bode well
for his security suitability. 
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F have been considered and none
apply. A potential mitigating condition is MC 4, which requires a person to initiate a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  He  has taken19
a few positive steps to resolve his financial problems as evidenced by paying off the
$111 collection account. But his efforts, in light of the remaining unaddressed financial
problems, are not enough to qualify as a good-faith effort. 
Applicant has done little to demonstrate an intent to clean up his financial house.
Concerning his past delinquent debts, what is missing here is: (1) a realistic and
workable plan; (2) documented actions taken in furtherance of the plan; and (3) a
measurable improvement to the situation. In simple terms, he did not present sufficient
evidence to establish his case. 
Given the lack of documentation, his claims, representations, and estimations
cannot be accepted as facts that a reasonable person might accept as reliable
evidence.  Large bureaucratic institutions—like the Defense Department and the20
security-clearance programs it administers—do not run on word-of-mouth.  They run on21
documentation. As a former soldier for ten years, Applicant should be aware of this
concept. The documentation can be stored electronically or on paper, but it is up to
Applicant to produce reliable evidence, to include documentary evidence, to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts admitted by him and proven by the record
evidence.  Although Applicant is not legally required to produce documentary evidence22
to prevail, the lack of documentation in a financial case makes it difficult to reach a
favorable decision under the clearly-consistent standard. Accordingly, Guideline F is
decided against Applicant. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support
a favorable decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
