1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-02233
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge:
On May 16, 2006, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF
86). On April 4, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing the security concerns under Guideline F to
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 26, 2007, but it did not comply
with instructions on the form of an Answer.  She filed another Answer on June 18, 2007.
She requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On December 6, 2007, Department Counsel submitted the Department’s written
case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the
2
Applicant. She was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on December 13, 2007.
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that would
have expired on January 12, 2008. I received the case assignment on March 27, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her Answers to the SOR, dated April 26, 2007, and June 18, 2007, Applicant
admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, through 1.e, and 1.g to 1.i of the SOR, with
explanations. She denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f of the SOR. She also
provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security
clearance.  
Applicant is 45 years old, divorced, and has five children and six grandchildren.
She works as a security guard for a defense contractor.  Applicant has nine delinquent
debts totaling $27,163 as listed in the SOR.  These delinquent debts are for telephone
service, medical bills, student loans, an auto loan for a repossessed car, credit card
debt, and utility bills.  Applicant denies knowing the origin of a telephone bill for $331
(Subparagraph 1.a), and a debt owed to a collector for $252 (Subparagraph 1.f) (Items
3, 5)
Applicant admits she is not able to repay her debts in a timely and reasonable
manner.  She continues to pay some of them, and works hard for her income.  She
takes care of her family as a single parent, and does not drink or use illegal drugs. (Item
5)
The credit reports, dated May 31, 2006, and February 16, 2007, pertaining to
Applicant show that the delinquent debts listed in the SOR are due and owing by her.
Applicant’s Answer does not present a repayment plan for any of these debts.  She
does not explain how she incurred these debts, nor how or when she intends to repay
them.  Applicant does not present any evidence of her financial circumstances in her
Answer.  Her SF-86 admits she was over 90 days delinquent on some debts (Question
28b), and she listed her student loan for $9,468 as delinquent.  The SOR alleges her
student loan debt is $15,394 which Applicant admitted is a correct amount.  That
creditor is deducting payments from her paycheck, and took her income tax refund.
She asserted she began making payments in January 15, 2007, but did not provide
documentary evidence to support her assertion. The delinquent debts listed in the SOR
are unpaid and owing by Applicant. (Items 7, 8)
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
3
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
4
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt that
she was unwilling or unable to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant did
not provide any evidence that would support the application of this mitigating condition.
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant did not provide
any evidence to support this mitigating condition being applied to her case.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ AG ¶ 20(e) applies where an Applicant has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of a debt.  Applicant supplied no evidence that would
support the application of any of these mitigating conditions.  
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
5
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems began,
Applicant was a mature adult. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) She accumulated debt, but does not
explain how or why she did. (See AG & 2(a)(2).)  There is no evidence of rehabilitation
or a change in her behavior regarding debt accumulation. (See AG & 2(a)(6).)  Applicant
has no arrangements to repay or resolve these delinquent debts, and they could be a
source of improper pressure or duress. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Of course, the issue is not
simply whether all her debts are paid.  It is whether her financial circumstances raise
concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. While these debts remain
unpaid or unresolved, they are sufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations.  I conclude that security concern against Applicant.  I conclude the
“whole person concept” against Applicant also.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a to 1.i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
PHILIP S. HOWE
Administrative Judge
