1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-07099
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 17,
2006. On January 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
J and G for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on March 5, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 7,
2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 4, 2008. The government
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant
testified on his own behalf and did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 14, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file,
2
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 13, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a- 1.c and ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b of the SOR, with explanations. He
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is 26 years old. He is single. After his high school graduation in 2000,
he attended college. After receiving his undergraduate degree in 2004, he began
employment with a defense contractor (GE 1). Since 2006, he has worked as a logistics
system engineer. He does not hold a security clearance (Tr. 14).
Applicant started drinking alcohol in high school with his friends. He drank beer
on the weekends. In June 2000, he was charged with underage possession of alcohol.
At the time he was at the beach for senior week activities. A complaint was received
about the noise where he was partying with his friends. The police were called and
found Applicant, age 18, and his friends drinking alcohol (Tr. 17). 
In June 2003, Applicant was 21 years old. He went to the beach with some of his
college friends. He was in a bar consuming alcohol. He and some other friends got into
a physical altercation. The police arrived arrested and charged him. The charges were
for (1) tumultuous behavior and (2) loitering in bar district. He was found guilty of charge
one. Charge two was dismissed. Applicant was fined (Tr. 18; GE 4).
While he was in college, (freshman year) Applicant admitted drinking to the point
of intoxication two times a week. He was disciplined for having alcohol in his dorm
room. He took an alcohol class (Tr. 29).
In January 2005, Applicant and some friends attended a football game. He had
been drinking during the game. After the game was over, he was walking in the streets.
The crowd was rowdy and he got caught in the middle of a fracas. He was arrested for
disorderly conduct and assault. He was hospitalized after the police put him down. He
spent the night in jail. The charge was nolle prosequi. He completed 24 hours of
community service. He also voluntarily attended an alcohol education class in his county
(Tr. 20). He realized that he needed to change his drinking behavior, consume less
alcohol and be more alert of his surroundings (Id).
At the time of the 2005 incident, Applicant was working for his current employer
(defense contractor). He did not want them to find out about the incident for fear of
losing his job (Tr. 21).
In July 2006, Applicant rented a beach house with some acquaintances. He was
not familiar with the group of people at the house. One evening after socializing and
drinking at the bars, he returned home. He asserts the guys were rowdy. A verbal
confrontation led into a physical fight. One person head butted Applicant in his nose. He
3
was hospitalized and obtained seven stitches (Tr. 22). At the hearing, Applicant
produced photos taken three days after the assault. The photos depicted the injury to
his nose. He was humiliated and afraid to present himself at work. He did not want his
managers to know the real reason for the injuries. He told them the injury resulted from
a volleyball incident. He feared that he might lose his job if he told them the real reason
(Tr. 23). 
Applicant pressed charges against the person who attacked him. In return,
charges were pressed against Applicant. Applicant returned to the beach town to face
the charges. The police charged Applicant with terroristic threats and offensive touching
(Tr. 25). The court nolle prossed the charge. The other person paid for Applicant’s
hospital bills. Applicant has decided not to return to the beach because the group binge
drinks and he has changed his behavior (Tr. 26). 
Applicant admits that he may have a drink three times a week, generally on the
weekends. He is more cautious about where he drinks and with whom he drinks. He
associates with other professionals who share the same lifestyle. He will go to a friend’s
house or go out to a bar with friends. He drinks in moderation because he realizes the
impact this might have on his career. He weighs approximately 164 pounds and knows
that after three beers he might be legally intoxicated. He does not stagger or have
slurred speech but he realizes that he could be intoxicated using the legal definition (Tr.
39). 
Applicant was credible in his testimony that he limits his drinking. He is more
aware and alert as to the amount of alcohol he drinks and with whom. He associates
with other like-minded career individuals (Tr. 41). He only drinks in what he considers a
controlled or safe place. 
Applicant’s work performance is good. He is a hard worker. He is now aware that
the party lifestyle interferes with a professional life and could jeopardize his career. He
believes he has matured in the last years. He has a good deal of responsibility at work.
He manages the operations of a department. He is part of a strategic development team
for his company. He participates in discussions with vice-presidents, directors and
mangers of his company (Tr. 51). He recently purchased a home which he is
refurbishing with the help of his Father.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation
5
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant’s alcohol-related charges and arrests from 2000 until July 2006,
constitute criminal activity as envisioned under ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement;
Applicant has had no infractions with the law since July 2006. He was younger
when he was involved in the incidents that involved drinking. He does not associate with
the same people as before. He is cognizant of his behavior and that drinking
excessively could jeopardize his career. He has been employed with the same company
for a number of years. He has a responsible job with management duties. He did
complete an alcohol class after his 2003 incident. He has modified his alcohol
consumption as described above. Applicant has mitigated allegations 1. a through 1.d
by the passage of time and by a successful change in his conduct, drinking and
associations. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply.
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and “(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.”
In this case, Applicant had an underage alcohol possession charge in 2000. He
was involved in an incident in college in 2003 after he had been drinking. The two
charges for disorderly conduct and offensive touching in 2005 and 2006 were both nolle
6
prossed. He admitted he was drinking during those times to the point of intoxication.
Thus, AG ¶ 22 (a) and (c) apply.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(C) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant’s last incident involving alcohol was in July 2006. The incident was not
totally his fault. In fact the charge was dismissed. Since that time, he has not had any
other alcohol-related incidents. His career is important to him. He has changed his
social life since his high school and college days. I conclude there is mitigation under
23(a).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Applicant drank when he was in high school and college with his friends at
parties and sometimes at a bar. He was drinking during his senior week when he was
charged with underage possession of alcohol in 2000. Applicant was caught up in an
incident with friends at the beach in 2003. He had been drinking. The charges in 2005
and 2006 for incidents involving alcohol were dismissed. Applicant explained the
circumstances. The last incident resulted in a physical altercation after drinking and
someone injuring him. He pressed charges and charges were then brought against him.
He realizes that this kind of party lifestyle is detrimental to his career.
He has been employed with a defense contractor for several years. He has a
position of responsibility. His demeanor at the hearing reflected his seriousness toward
the issue of drinking to intoxication. He acknowledged at the hearing that he no longer
associates with the group of people at the beach. He is aware of his alcohol
consumption. He drinks with friends at home or in a safe environment. He has matured
and accepted responsibility for the actions that occurred in the past.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence does
not leave me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security
concerns arising from criminal conduct and alcohol consumption. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
