                                                              
                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ADP Case No. 07-09090   
                                  ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
                                                                             
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on January 
12, 2007. On October 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, for Applicant. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within 
the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 2, 2007.  He answered 
the SOR in writing on December 21, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on January 2, 2008. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 25, 2008, and I received the case 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
assignment on February 27, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 11, 2008,    
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 26, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 4, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on 
his own behalf, called one witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 9, 2008. The record 
closed on that date. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. In addition, 
after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old male employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
who is seeking a position of trust. He has a bachelor of science degree in information 
technology. He is married and has an eight-year-old daughter.  He recently learned that his 
wife is pregnant. (Tr at 5, 47-48; Gov 1.) 
 
In June 2003, Applicant was experiencing some personal problems. He felt that he 
was never appreciated at work or by his wife and daughter. In order to relieve stress, 
Applicant began to have sexual fantasies involving young girls. This lead to Applicant 
exposing himself to young teenage girls on two occasions. The first incident involved a girl 
between the age of 13-15. He was not arrested for this offense. The second incident 
occurred a few days later.  He saw a 13 year-old girl walking. He drove his car up the 
street, got out of the car and waited for the girl to walk by. When she walked by, Applicant 
called to her in order to get her attention. When she looked in his direction, he exposed his 
lower torso to her.  The girl ran away and the Applicant got into his car and drove away. (Tr 
at 54-55; Gov 2.) 
 
In July 2003, Applicant was contacted by a private investigator who was 
investigating a charge of indecent exposure. The victim had memorized the license plate 
number of Applicant’s car which was registered to his mother-in-law. The following day, 
Applicant was arrested at his place of employment. (Gov 2.)  
 
On July 18, 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with Indecency with a Child 
By Exposure.  On June 3, 2004, Applicant pled guilty to the charge. He was placed on five 
years supervised probation from June 3, 2004 to June 3, 2009. He was ordered to register 
as a sex offender and ordered to attend psychological treatment. He paid a total of $3,007 
in fines and court costs and completed 400 hours community service. (Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 
4.) The sex offender registry lists Applicant’s risk level as moderate. (Gov 4.) 
   
On October 10, 2004, Applicant started his court-ordered sex offender treatment 
program. The first phase of the treatment is known as (the intensive phase) and consists of 
the participant attending a weekly group meeting, and a monthly individual meeting with his 
counselor.  He completed the first phase of the treatment on January 21, 2007.  The 
 
3 
 
second phase of the treatment is considered the maintenance phase and lasts about two 
years. Applicant is required to attend two monthly meetings. One is a group meeting. The 
other is an individual meeting with his counselor. When Applicant reaches the third phase, 
he is required to meet with his therapist every three months.  (Tr at 18-19, 52-53; Gov 2.) 
 
Applicant’s therapist testified during the hearing. He is Licensed Master Social 
Worker who has worked with sex offenders since early 1980. The program Applicant 
attends takes about four to five years to complete and involves cognitive behavioral 
therapy. Applicant has accepted total responsibility for his behavior and has successfully 
participated in the program. He has learned to identify risk factors, and how to intervene 
and successfully avoid future similar behavior. Applicant’s prognosis is excellent for 
continued compliance in the program. He describes Applicant as a “situational sex 
offender” as opposed to a person who has a deviant sexual attraction to children.  The 
therapist testified that his evaluation is not a psychological or psychiatric evaluation.  
Applicant is currently in the maintenance phase of treatment. The maintenance phase is 
supposed to reinforce the techniques learned during the intensive phase. His observations 
indicate that Applicant is using the techniques that he learned.  Nationwide there is an 80% 
success rate in the program. In the therapist’s opinion, it is unlikely that Applicant will 
reoffend. Applicant has demonstrated that he has everything he needs to lead a deviant 
free life.  He cannot guarantee that Applicant will never reoffend.  When asked about the 
fact that Applicant’s risk level was described as “moderate” on the sex offender registry, 
Applicant’s therapist said that he was not familiar with the standards the court applies to 
assess the risk level.(Tr at 16-46.)    
 
On the advice of his attorney, Applicant saw a psychologist for a few months prior to 
his court date. The psychologist concluded Applicant was suffering from depression, 
anxiety, and stress. He was not prescribed any medication. He stopped seeing the 
psychologist because he thought he was wasting his time. (Tr at 61-63.)  
 
Applicant does not know whether his neighbors are aware that he is registered sex 
offender. He would be embarrassed if they knew. He does not go around telling people 
unless required but he has accepted responsibility for his past actions. He has lost some 
friends based on the offense. His relatives know of the offense. He admits that what he did 
was wrong and he is trying to change his life. (TR 58-60, 63.)  
 
So far, Applicant has complied with all the terms and conditions of his sentence and 
probation. His probation does not end until June 3, 2009. (Tr at 52.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as Asensitive positions.@  
(See Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See Regulation & 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
 
4 
 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply 
to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The 
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 30 of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
 willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are three Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) that apply to 
Applicant’s case. They are CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses); CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted); and CC DC   
¶ 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation). Applicant admits to two incidents of 
exposing himself to young teenage girls. He was prosecuted for the second incident. He 
pled and was found guilty of Indecent Acts with a Child by Exposure. He is currently on 
probation. His probation will not end until June 3, 2009.  
 
The criminal conduct concern can be mitigated. I find that it is premature to apply 
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) because Applicant is still serving the terms of his probation.  Although Applicant 
has not been arrested or charged with an offense since July 2003, the serious nature of the 
offense, the fact that Applicant was a mature adult at the time of the offense, and the fact 
that he committed the offense on two occasions leads me to conclude that insufficient time 
has elapsed before CC MC ¶ 32(a) can be applied.  
 
It is premature to apply CC MC ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal 
activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement) because Applicant remains on probation until June 
2009.  It is noted that he has made progress through his court-ordered counseling program, 
and has followed all the terms of probation so far.  
 
At this time, it is premature to conclude that Applicant has mitigated the criminal 
conduct concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline D – Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern raised under the sexual behavior guideline is set forth in ¶ 12 
of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
 emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
 subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
 can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
 to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning the 
 standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
 orientation of the individual.  
    
 There are several Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Conditions (SB DC) that apply to 
Applicant’s case. 
 
 SB DC ¶ 13(a) (sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual 
has been prosecuted) applies. Applicant admits to two incidents of indecent exposure both 
involving a young teenage girl.  Both of these incidents were criminal in nature.   
 
 SB DC ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress) applies. Applicant’s actions make him vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  He admitted that he is embarrassed by his past behavior. 
While he indicates that he discloses his past behavior when he is required, there is still a 
potential for a situation to arise where Applicant would not want his past arrest and sexual 
conduct disclosed which makes him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
 SB DC ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment) applies.  Applicant exposed himself on two separate occasions to 
minor teenage girls on a public street. His conduct was sexual behavior of a public nature  
and reveals a lack of discretion or judgment. 
 
 I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 2.b. It alleges that Applicant received 
treatment at a sex offender program. Attending a sex offender treatment program is not 
sexual behavior. Attending treatment is a positive development and represents good 
judgment by Applicant even though the treatment is court-ordered. No disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising under sexual behavior. The following Sexual Behavior 
Mitigating Conditions (SB MC) have the potential to apply: 
 
 SB DC ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable.  
 
7 
 
Applicant admits to two incidents of indecent exposure. The victim in each instance was a 
minor teenage girl. Although several years have passed since his arrest and he has actively 
participated in his court-ordered therapy, it is premature to apply SB DC ¶ 14(b) because 
Applicant is still serving probation.   
 
 SB DC ¶ 14c (the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress) cannot be applied. While Applicant has disclosed the nature of his offense to family 
members and other friends who need to know, he remains embarrassed about his past 
sexual conduct. Due to the sensitive nature of Applicant’s past behavior, there is always a 
potential that Applicant may be subject to coercion, exploitation or duress. SB DC ¶ 14c 
does not apply.  
 
 Although Applicant made progress through his court-ordered therapy, it is too soon 
to conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under Sexual Behavior.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant=s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the Applicant=s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): A(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual=s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.@ Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole 
person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant was 35-years-old when he 
committed these offenses. The offenses reveal a lack of judgment and discretion. While he 
should be commended for the progress that he has made in his therapy sessions, he 
remains on probation until June 2009.  Not enough time has passed to conclude that 
Applicant is fully rehabilitated. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or 
doubts as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under 
criminal conduct and sexual behavior.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
