1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-07669
SSN: ------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concern under
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
DOHA received Applicant’s answer, requesting a hearing, on November 27,
2008. I received the case assignment on December 20, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on January 24, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 7,
2008. During the hearing, I received three government exhibits, three Applicant exhibits,
and the testimony of two Applicant witnesses. Applicant attempted to move a fourth
exhibit, a 43-page document, into the record. Department counsel objected because
she had not seen it before the hearing. I identified it as Exhibit D, reserving judgment on
2
its admissibility until department counsel had an opportunity to review it after the
hearing. At the hearing’s conclusion, I left the record open to allow Applicant the
opportunity to submit additional exhibits. After the hearing, department counsel
reviewed Exhibit D and withdrew her objection, whereupon I received it. Also, Applicant
submitted two additional exhibits within the time allotted, which I incorporated into the
record. I received the transcript on February 27, 2008. Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48-year-old, married man with one adult child. Both he and his wife
are professional truck drivers. He has an eighth grade education (Tr. 34).
In 1997, Applicant and his wife started a trucking business. They financed the
purchase of two eighteen-wheelers for approximately $230,000. Typically, they drove
one together, and either leased the other or hired employees to drive it (Tr. 46, 49).
The business struggled. Applicant and his wife had trouble finding competent
employees, and they underestimated the vehicles’ maintenance costs (Tr. 46). When
his wife experienced a serious medical crisis in 2001, everything “snowballed” (Tr. 25).
Because they had no medical insurance, they incurred tremendous out-of-pocket health
care expenses and grew increasingly unable to pay their business expenses.
In October 2000, Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection
(Exhibit D). The court discharged approximately $290,000 of business and personal
debt (Exhibit D at 11). 
Although Applicant and his wife had to return one of the trucks to the creditor as
part of the bankruptcy process, they were able to continue operating the business. They
failed, however, to set aside funds in an escrow account to pay their federal income
taxes (Tr. 50). In 2002, they were unable to pay them when due (Id.). With the help of
their accountant, Applicant and his wife arranged an installment plan and paid an
average of $200 per month (Tr. 49-51, 64).
Applicant and his wife were again unable to pay their federal income taxes in
2003 and 2004. They arranged installment plans for those years also (Tr. 50). In 2003,
Applicant and his wife “saved up and splurged” on two Caribbean vacations (Tr. 42,
Exhibit 1).
When Applicant and his wife were unable to pay their federal income taxes in
2004, their accountant advised them that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) did not
allow taxpayers to arrange installment plans for more than three consecutive years (Tr.
51). They then did not file their 2004 income tax return (Tr. 56).
3
Applicant’s wife experienced another major medical problem in 2005 (Tr. 70). In
early 2006, they filed their 2004 and 2005 income tax returns. At that time, they had
paid approximately $2,735 toward the 2002 and 2003 delinquencies through the
installment plans (Exhibit E). Through their accountant, they then began negotiating an
offer and compromise (Tr. 57). 
The accountant worked on a settlement with the IRS for approximately a year
before quitting abruptly (Tr. 57). In December 2007, the IRS froze Applicant and his
wife’s bank account, obtained a lien against their property for $61,838, and began
garnishing Applicant’s wages (Exhibit C, Tr. 29). Currently, he has paid approximately
$970 through the garnishment (Exhibit B). The bank account remains frozen (Tr. 29,
33). 
Over the years, Applicant incurred three delinquent medical expenses,
collectively less than $800, related to on-the job injuries (SOR subparagraphs 1.b
through 1.d). He satisfied the delinquency listed in SOR subparagraph 1.b (Exhibit F).
SOR subparagraph 1.c remains unpaid and SOR subparagraph 1.d is in dispute.
Applicant and his wife have retained another accounting firm to help resolve the
tax delinquencies (Exhibit A). Their goal is to satisfy the tax delinquencies, then “move
on to a plan that will pay the medical [bills]” (Tr. 25).
Applicant has not sought money management counseling. Recently, he read a
self-help book by a prominent money management expert, and has been incorporating
the book’s lessons into their daily financial plan (Tr. 35). Applicant and his wife estimate
their delinquencies will be satisfied in three years.
Applicant and his wife ended their business in 2005. Since then Applicant has
been working for the same company.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.).
Applicant’s history of financial problems, and failure to file his 2004 federal
income taxes on time triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” 19(e), “consistent
spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness,
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,”
and 19(g), “failure to file Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required.” I have
considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant’s financial
problems were originally caused by his struggling business and his wife’s illness. When
they became overwhelming, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2000.
Shortly after the court discharged his debts, however, his financial problems recurred. In
2003, as he was increasingly losing control of his finances again, he spent money on
two Caribbean vacations. Consequently, although Applicant’s problems were originally
caused by circumstances beyond his control, he did not deal with them responsibly.
Applicant acknowledges that his financial problems recurred because of
irresponsibility. He has outlined a debt repayment plan, and has retained an accounting
firm for assistance. However, the plan is sketchy at best, and the only payments he has
made thus far have been through a wage garnishment. I conclude Applicant’s finances
remain a security concern.
5
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Applicant’s struggling business and his spouse’s major medical problems
contributed to his financial problems. His limited education was also a factor. His
financial problems recurred after a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. Although he has
taken steps to get his finances under control, it is too soon to conclude they no longer
pose a security concern in light of the remaining amount of the delinquencies and their
recurrent nature. Evaluating this case in the context of the whole person, I conclude
Applicant’s financial problems remain a security concern. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
