  
  
1
`                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08344 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 17, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 
2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 26, 2008, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on March 18, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, 
  
  
2
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 28, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Lebanon and Jordan. Applicant did not object. The request 
and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the 
record as HE I through XXII. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel submitted a motion to amend the SOR by changing 
“Lebanon” and “Lebanese” in SOR ¶ 1.a to “Jordan” and “Jordanian.” Applicant did not 
object and the motion was granted. The motion and Applicant’s response were marked 
HE XXIII and XXIV. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was born in the 
United States of a Jordanian father and a Lebanese mother while her father was 
attending an American university. Her parents took her to Lebanon in 1975, where she 
lived until 1976. She lived in Saudi Arabia with her parents from 1976 to 1991. She 
returned to the United States in 1991, before she turned 17, to attend college. She 
graduated in four years with a bachelor’s degree. She went to Lebanon in 1995 to 
attend graduate school, and obtained a master’s degree. She returned to the United 
States in 1999, and has lived here since her return. She has never been married and 
has no children.1 
 
 Applicant obtained a Jordanian passport in 1990, when she was 15 years old, in 
order to visit her grandmother in Lebanon. At the time there were travel restrictions for 
U.S. citizens. The passport expired in 1995, but was renewed to 2000. Applicant never 
used the passport to travel to Lebanon, or any other country. The passport has not been 
renewed since it expired in 2000. Applicant never lived in Jordan. She never truly felt 
like she was a Jordanian citizen, but she acknowledged that her acquiring the passport 
was an exercise of Jordanian citizenship. She testified that she would be willing to 
relinquish her Jordanian citizenship.2  
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen of Jordan and her mother is a citizen of Lebanon. 
They both are U.S. permanent residents. Her parents own a house in Jordan and they 
have a condominium and an apartment in Lebanon. They may also have commercial 
property in Jordan. Her parents split their time between Lebanon, Jordan, and the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 27-30, 39-44, 47, 66; GE 1-4. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-33, 64-66, 84-86; GE 1-4. 
  
  
3
United States. She estimates they spend on average about two months per year in 
Lebanon, six months in Jordan, and the rest of the year in the U.S. Her father is 67 
years old and her mother is 66 years old. Her father is a physician. Her mother was a 
teacher. They are both retired.3 
 
 Applicant has three sisters and a brother. Her oldest sister was born in Saudi 
Arabia when her father was working there. She became a U.S. citizen in 2002. Her 
husband is also a U.S. citizen. She has lived in the U.S. for about 11 years. They have 
children who are U.S. citizens. Applicant’s second oldest sister married a citizen of the 
United Kingdom, and she became a U.K. citizen. They currently live in Kuwait. He is a 
college professor. They have a child who is a U.K. citizen. Applicant’s younger brother 
is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He attended college in the United States and 
returned to Jordan after he graduated. He is employed in a commercial industry. Her 
youngest sister is also a citizen and resident of Jordan. She was working for a private 
company. Applicant is unsure if her sister is still working for the same company. 
Applicant maintains periodic telephone contact with two aunts in Lebanon. None of 
Applicant’s family members have any direct connection to a foreign government or to 
any terrorist organization. Applicant sponsored her family for permanent residence 
status in the U.S. She hopes that they become U.S. citizens but the process has taken 
longer than anticipated.4  
 
 Applicant visited her parents in Saudi Arabia in 1999. She visited Lebanon in 
2000, and Lebanon and Jordan in July to August 2001. She visited the U.K. in 2002. 
Applicant visited Canada in 2006. She had a clearance at the time and fully reported her 
travel to her security officer. She has not returned to any Middle Eastern country since 
September 11, 2001.5 
 
 Applicant worked for a foreign embassy in the U.S. from about 2000 to 2004. It is 
not one of the countries already discussed in this decision. Her job was to assist citizens 
of that country who were students in the United States. As an Arabic speaker who 
attended college in the United States, Applicant shared some common experiences with 
the students. She had no dealings with the Ambassador. There are no indications that 
Applicant had any dealings with this country before or after she worked at the embassy. 
Her current job heavily relies on her ability to speak Arabic. She maintained an interim 
clearance without incident until it was withdrawn. Her job is contingent upon her 
obtaining a clearance. Applicant plans on remaining in the United States, but candidly 
admitted that if she lost her job and could not find another one in the U.S., that she 
would expand her search overseas. She does not anticipate inheriting any of her 
parent’s property in Lebanon and Jordan because it is customarily passed to a male 
heir. Applicant’s estimates the value of her assets in the U.S. at $110,000. She has no 
foreign assets.6  
                                                          
 
3 Tr. at 33-36, 41, 80-82, 86-88; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 36-38, 44-54, 68-69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 56-63, 80-81, 87-88; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
  
  
4
 Character letters from Applicant’s supervisor and co-workers attest that she is a 
trusted employee and highly regarded colleague. Her science background and 
language ability proved very valuable in her projects involved in the Global War on 
Terrorism. They state she is hard-working, conscientious, intelligent, honest, 
professional, competent, dedicated, diligent, and discrete. She is described as “a lady of 
great character, integrity and loyalty, and takes great pride in serving and protecting our 
nation everyday.” She is highly recommended for a security clearance.7 
 
Lebanon 
 
 Lebanon is a parliamentary republic. The U.S. has traditionally had close ties 
with Lebanon, and it seeks to help preserve Lebanon’s independence, sovereignty, 
national unity, and territorial integrity.  
 
 Lebanon does not recognize Israel and has technically been in a state of war 
with Israel since its establishment. Its foreign policy and internal policies have been 
heavily influenced by Syria after the entry of Syrian troops into Lebanon in March 1976.  
Even after the withdrawal of Syrian troops in April 2005, Syria continued to conduct 
intelligence activities in Lebanon and to exercise a strong influence on Lebanese 
politics. 
 
 Syria, designated by the U.S. as a state sponsor of terrorism, provides political 
and material support to Hizballah, the most prominent terrorist group in Lebanon.  
Hizballah has been designated by the U.S. as a foreign terrorist organization, closely 
connected to Iran and a strong ally of Syria in advancing its political objectives in 
Lebanon. Hizballah supports numerous violent anti-Western groups and is known to 
have been involved in numerous anti-U.S. and anti-Israel terrorist attacks. It initiated a 
military confrontation with Israel in July-August 2006, jeopardizing the long-term stability 
of Lebanon and complicating U.S.-Lebanese relations as the U.S. strived to support 
Israel’s right of self defense without abandoning its efforts to support rebuilding of 
democratic institutions in Lebanon. Between 1996 and 2004, Hizballah received 
financial support from a global criminal enterprise operating in Lebanon, Canada, China, 
Brazil, Paraguay, and the U.S.  
 
According to the U.S. Department of State Report on Human Rights Practices, 
Lebanese security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained individuals and there were 
instances of arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of life, torture, and other abuse. Militias 
and non-Lebanese forces operating outside the area of central government authority 
frequently violated citizens’ privacy rights. Various factions also used informer networks 
and monitoring of telephones to obtain information regarding their perceived 
adversaries. During the year before the conflict broke out, the government took 
significant steps to increase freedom of assembly and association at mass 
demonstrations and by facilitating the formation of new political associations and 
parties. The government also took concrete measures to prevent unauthorized 
eavesdropping on private citizens. 
 
                                                          
 
7 AE A-D. 
  
  
5
Jordan 
 
 Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern 
infrastructure. Jordan has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close 
relations with the U.S. for more than four decades.  
 
The Jordanian government respects human rights in some areas, but its overall 
record continues to reflect some problems. Problems include: torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement on citizen’s privacy rights, 
political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, 
and movement.  
 
Under Jordanian law any male relative may prevent a woman or child from 
leaving Jordan by placing a hold on their travel with the Jordanian authorities, even if 
they are U.S. citizens. Jordanian law applies to dual U.S.-Jordanian citizens. 
 
The Jordanian government publicly condemned terrorist acts throughout the 
world, practiced strict security measures, passed new anti-terror legislation, and 
disrupted several terrorist plots. Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, the 
threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist activities 
against Jordan and U.S. interests in Jordan. Terrorist organizations have targeted the 
U.S. for intelligence through human espionage and by other means. International 
terrorist groups have conducted intelligence operations as effectively as state 
intelligence services. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
  
6
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
 
 (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 Applicant possessed a Jordanian passport while a U.S. citizen. The passport 
expired in 2000. AG ¶ 10(a) was applicable. The possession of the Jordanian passport 
 
7 
 
while a U.S. citizen could raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain 
recognition of her Jordanian citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Applicant never truly felt like she was a Jordanian citizen, but she acknowledged 
that she was able to obtain a passport from Jordan because her father was a citizen of 
Jordan, which amounted to an exercise of Jordanian citizenship. AG ¶ 11(a) does not 
totally apply because she actively sought recognition of her Jordanian citizenship. AG ¶ 
11(b) is applicable because she expressed a willingness to renounce her Jordanian 
citizenship. Applicant first obtained the passport when she was a minor, but renewed it 
as an adult. AG ¶ 11(c) is partially applicable. The passport has been expired for eight 
years and Applicant does not intend to renew it or obtain another one. AG ¶ 11(e) is 
applicable.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
 
8 
 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Jordan. Her mother is a citizen of Lebanon. They 
both have permanent residence status in the U.S. They are retired professionals and 
can afford to travel and divide their time between Jordan, Lebanon, and the U.S. She 
has three sisters and a brother. Her oldest sister is a U.S. citizen, as is her husband and 
children. She has a sister who is a citizen of the United Kingdom. She, along with her 
British husband and child currently live in Kuwait. Her younger brother and sister are 
both citizens and residents of Jordan. Lebanon and Jordan continue to have human 
rights issues, and they both have been victimized by terrorists. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence.  
 
Applicant does not own any foreign assets. Her parents have homes and 
property in both Jordan and Lebanon. Applicant does not anticipate inheriting her 
parents’ property in those countries. The fact that her parents own foreign property is 
not sufficient to completely raise AG ¶ 7(e), but it clearly is a factor for consideration in 
this case. 
 
Applicant worked for a foreign embassy in the U.S. from about 2000 to 2004. 
That could raise AG ¶ 7(b) for consideration. Her job was to assist students and she 
had very little contact with the diplomatic aspects of the embassy. It has been four years 
since she worked for the embassy and there are no indications that Applicant had any 
dealings with this country before or after she worked at the embassy. Her contact with 
this country through their embassy was merely as an employee who possessed 
specialized language skills that made her marketable. 
 
9 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant was born in the United States, but spent a large part of her youth 
overseas. She returned to the U.S. in 1991, when she was still 16 years old, to attend 
college. She went to Lebanon in 1995 to attend graduate school. She has lived in the 
U.S. since 1999. Her parents are permanent residents of the United States, but divide 
their time between the United States, Jordan, and Lebanon. Her sister and her sister’s 
family are U.S. citizens and residents. I find that Applicant has deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S. AG ¶ 8(b) is partially applicable. Applicant has not 
had contact with the foreign citizens from the embassy where she was employed since 
she stopped working there in 2004. AG ¶ 8(c) is applicable to her contacts with that 
embassy. No other mitigating condition is fully applicable. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
10 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in the U.S. 
Except for one year in Lebanon, she spent much of her youth in Saudi Arabia, where 
her father was working as a physician. She returned to the U.S. when she was 16 years 
old to attend college. She attended graduate school in Lebanon, but she has lived in the 
U.S. since 1999. She worked at a foreign embassy for about four years, using her 
language skills and experience to assist students from that country who were attending 
school in the U.S. She has not been in contact with that embassy or its personnel since 
2004. She has no loyalty toward this country. She has not traveled to any country in the 
Middle East since before September 11, 2001. She is very well thought of at her current 
employment, where her Arabic language skills are highly valued.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Lebanon and Jordan. 
Lebanon is a parliamentary republic which traditionally has maintained close ties with 
the United States. Jordan is a constitutional monarchy which has followed a pro-western 
foreign policy and has had close relations with the U.S. for more than four decades. 
However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
11 
 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Also very 
important is whether the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
  
 Both Jordan and Lebanon have human rights issues and have been victimized 
by terrorism. The influence of Syria and the presence of Hizballah in Lebanon and Al-
Qaida in Jordan are serious concerns. However, Applicant has proven that she supports 
the Global War on Terrorism, in which her language skills and science background have 
proven to be valuable assets. The Appeal Board has stated that “an applicant’s proven 
record of action in defense of the U.S. is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”9 The Appeal Board case is distinguishable 
from Applicant’s case as it was discussing an applicant who performed dangerous work 
as a translator in Afghanistan, which is not what Applicant has done. Nonetheless, 
Applicant’s work merits special consideration.  
 
Applicant spent much of her youth in Saudi Arabia and attended graduate school 
in Lebanon, but the last nine years of her adult life have been in the U.S. Her parents 
spend a few months a year in Lebanon. They spend a longer time in Jordan and her 
brother and sister live in Jordan, a country where Applicant has never lived. One sister 
and her family are U.S. citizens and residents. Applicant sponsored her other family 
members for permanent residence status and looks forward to them becoming U.S. 
citizens. Her life, career, assets, and allegiance all lie in the U.S. After considering all 
the evidence, including Applicant’s candid and honest testimony and her valuable and 
highly regarded work for her current employer, I am convinced that this country is best 
served by granting Applicant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:  For Applicant    
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
