 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------.  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01144 
 SSN: ------------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On October 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and 
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial). 
 
 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
 
2 
                                      
 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on 
November 5, 2007, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing. A letter was attached to the answer with some explanatory information. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 29, 2007, was 
provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide any additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on March 13, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR 14 of the 19 allegations in the SOR 
of financial considerations specifically relating to delinquent debts. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 37-years-old. He has been an employee of a defense contractor 
since September 2004 and now works as a program analyst. He did not hold a security 
clearance before his present SF 86 was filed. He is married with one child. He was 
diagnosed as bi-polar in 1987 and was on medication until 1997 when he had 
progressed to the point that he no longer needed it. He has been in good health since 
that time with the exception of one medical event in 2004 when he was under stress. He 
was unemployed and his income was low from 2000 to 2004. Part of that time he was 
studying in a university. He does not have a university degree.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under Guideline F of the Directive is that Applicant incurred 
debts totaling over $38,000 which became delinquent and have not been resolved. He 
admits to over $36,000 of the debts. None of the remaining delinquent debts have been 
resolved. He defaulted on student loans and two automobiles have been repossessed. 
The largest single debt is approximately $14,000 and the smallest is $70.  
 
 Applicant avers in the answer to one interrogatory (Exh. 5) that he has 
consolidated a number of these debts and is paying to a consolidator and three 
creditors on a monthly basis. Even the smallest debts have not been resolved. He and 
his wife have a combined monthly salary of $4,500 and have a remainder of $1,100 
after payments of living expenses as well as almost $1,000 on the delinquent debts 
according to his financial statement in the interrogatory.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
3 
                                      
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,” 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
 Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that Guideline F provides the standard for resolution of the allegations 
set forth in the SOR. It states: 
 
Guideline F Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report (Item 7). 
At least 14 of the debts remain unresolved. The majority of his delinquent debts remain 
delinquent. He has indicated in his interrogatory that some have been consolidated and 
are being paid but has provided insufficient documentation to show that this is occurring 
and that significant progress is being made to resolve his debts. The government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19 (c).  
 
 Five Mitigating Conditions (MC) under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are provided and have 
been considered:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant provided no documentation in either his answer or through 
interrogatories to establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(e). His statement about his 
payments to creditors is insufficient because he did not provide documentary proof of 
such payments. Even if he had provided proof of such payments, those payments would 
not be sufficient to mitigate financial considerations because of the magnitude of the 
remaining delinquent debt. Although his unemployment and medical problems contributed 
to his financial problems and were largely beyond his control, he did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances since his current employment, and AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply because there are not clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control, and he did not establish that he acted in 
good faith to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because he did not provide 
“documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions previously discussed through application of the whole person concept. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
 
6 
                                      
 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations. He has had health and 
unemployment issues which no doubt contributed to his financial problems. He may well 
have made some progress in resolving the debts but has failed to produce reliable 
evidence to support his contentions. Applicant currently has substantial unresolved, 
delinquent debt. He has had and now has sufficient income to make greater progress 
resolving the delinquent debt.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), a careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting 
evidence, application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or 
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
    ___________________ 
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
