 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------  ISCR Case No. 07-04460 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on May 16, 2006. On 
November 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 19, 2007; answered it 
on December 7, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on December 11, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on December 27, 2007, and the case was assigned to me on January 2, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
February 11, 2008.  
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant retained individual counsel on January 25, 2008. His counsel filed 
motions for a continuance and change of venue on January 28, 2008; and I granted the 
motions by order on January 31, 2008 (Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II). DOHA issued a 
second notice of hearing on February 1, 2008, scheduling the hearing for March 10, 
2008. On March 4, 2008, Applicant’s counsel withdrew from representation (HX III).  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 10, 2008. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. I granted his request to keep the record open until March 28, 2008, to 
enable him to submit additional evidence. He did not submit any additional evidence.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 18, 2008. The record closed 
on March 28, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Department Counsel offered GX 3, DOHA interrogatories that included a 
personal subject interview extracted from a report of investigation, without calling an 
authenticating witness as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the 
authentication requirement to Applicant, and he waived it (Tr. 47). Accordingly, I 
admitted GX 3.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations, but he disputed 
the starting date of his excessive consumption of alcohol alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. His 
admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old assistant research engineer for a defense contractor.  
He has worked for his current employer since January 2000. He holds a bachelor’s 
degree in computer science and is enrolled in a master’s degree program. He received 
a clearance in June 2000. 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol after his 21st birthday in 1996. At first he 
consumed about one beer once a week. He recalled three occasions between 1998 and 
1999 when he became mildly intoxicated (Tr. 30-31). Around August 2002, he began 
drinking 4-5 beers at a time and as much as 15-20 shots of hard liquor over the course 
of an evening (GX 3 at 5-6). 
 
 In August 2003, Applicant drank to the point of intoxication at a party and passed 
out on the front lawn of the residence where the party occurred. He was discovered by 
the police, taken to a hospital, and eventually charged with public intoxication. He 
pleaded guilty and paid a fine of about $300 (GX 3 at 4; GX 4).  
 
 
3 
 
 
 At a New Year’s Eve party on January 1, 2004, Applicant became intoxicated, 
attempted to walk home, and passed out on a sidewalk. He was found by a policeman, 
taken to a hospital, and charged with public intoxication. He pleaded guilty and paid a 
fine of about $300 (GX 3 at 4; GX 5). 
 
 On March 17, 2006, Applicant visited about three bars with friends, celebrating 
St. Patrick’s Day. He became heavily intoxicated, attempted to walk home, mistakenly 
entered someone else’s residence instead of his own, and passed out. An occupant of 
the residence summoned the police, who charged him with criminal trespass and 
criminal mischief. He was convicted of the criminal mischief charge and fined about 
$600. 
 
 After the St. Patrick’s Day incident, Applicant stopped drinking hard liquor and 
limited himself to three beers in an evening (GX 3 at 6). However, on his birthday in 
June 2007, he consumed six drinks and considered himself too impaired to drive (Tr. 
34). 
 
 Applicant testified he has not consumed any alcohol since November 2007 (Tr. 
29, 41, 45). He decided to stop consuming alcohol after receiving the SOR and reading 
Guideline G (Tr. 56). He has never received any counseling or treatment for his alcohol 
use (Tr. 37). He has not participated in Alcoholics Anonymous or similar organizations 
(Tr. 46). He has never been evaluated by a medical professional. He testified he 
believes he can stop drinking on his own, without a support structure (Tr. 64). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
 
 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline G is set out in AG & 21 as follows: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
The SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant consumed alcohol, “at times to excess and to 
the point of intoxication,” from about 1996 to at least March 2007. Based on the 
evidence of record, I conclude Applicant’s excessive consumption of alcohol 
commenced in 1998 as he asserted, and not in 1996 as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The SOR 
also alleges arrests and convictions for public intoxication in August 2003 and January 
2004 (¶¶ 1.b and 1.c), charges of alcohol-related criminal trespass and criminal mischief 
in March 2006, and a conviction of criminal mischief (¶ 1.d).  
 
 
5 
 
 
A disqualifying condition may arise from “alcohol-related incidents away from 
work, such as driving while under the influence . . , disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(a). Applicant’s three alcohol-related convictions 
raise this potentially disqualifying condition.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may arise from “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. AG ¶ 22(c). “Binge drinking” is 
“the consumption of five or more drinks in a row on at least one occasion.”  U.S. Dept. 
of Health & Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, The  National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Binge Drinking Among 
Underage Persons, Apr. 11, 2002, available at http://www.oas.samhsa.gov.  Applicant’s 
description of his drinking habits raises AG ¶ 22(c). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns arising from alcohol consumption may be mitigated if “so much 
time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” AG ¶ 23(a). The first prong (“so 
much time has passed”) is not established; because Applicant’s last alcohol-related 
conviction was only two years ago, and he did not stop drinking until November 2007, 
after he received the SOR. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established in light 
of his multiple convictions and regular pattern of heavy drinking until his last conviction. 
The third prong (“unusual circumstances”) is not established because his excessive 
drinking occurred under normal social conditions, with no external pressures. Finally, 
the record is insufficient to establish that his conduct is “unlikely to recur.” He has not 
sought or received any counseling or treatment, and has no support structure for his 
continued sobriety. I conclude AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG¶ 23(b).  Applicant has 
acknowledged his alcohol abuse, but has not sought treatment, counseling, or a support 
group. His period of abstinence, only about four months at the time of the hearing, was 
triggered by the pressure of keeping his clearance, and it is too short to constitute a 
“pattern” of abstinence. I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is not established.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated, obviously intelligent adult. He was candid 
and sincere at the hearing. However, his drinking to the point of unconsciousness while 
holding a security clearance raises doubts about his judgment and reliability. His receipt 
of the SOR may have triggered a lifestyle change, but it is too soon to tell. His lack of 
treatment, counseling, or a support structure militates against continued sobriety. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline G, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
