 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07638 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
                                                          
1Item 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Nov. 18, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his security clearance, and recommended referral 
to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on November 21, 2007, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 12, 2008, was provided to him on 
February 26, 2008, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant’s response was due on 
March 29, 2008. Applicant responded to the FORM on March 21, 2008. Department 
Counsel did not object to my consideration of Applicant’s response to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on March 31, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of the SOR’s allegations with 
explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact.   
 
 Applicant is 50 years old.5 He attended one year of college in 1994. He married 
his first spouse in 1978, and divorced in 1980. He married his current spouse in 1980. 
He has three children, who were born in 1981, 1983, and 1984. He served on active 
duty in the Air Force from 1978 to 1998.  When he completed his security clearance 
application (Item 4) on August 26, 2006, he described problems he had with his 
employer concerning an improper fee-splitting arrangement for referral of new 
employees. He concluded his explanation stating: 
 
In retrospect, I made an incredibly bad decision accepting the referral 
money from [my employer] for people I did not directly refer to the 
company; and I truly regret that decision. [My company] has asked me to 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Feb. 19, 2008; 
however, Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated Feb. 26, 200[8]. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt of the FORM to submit information. 
 
4Item 2 (Applicant’s response to the SOR, dated Dec. 10, 2007) is the source for the facts in this 
section, unless stated otherwise. 
 
5Item 4 (Questionnaire for National Security Positions, Standard Form 86, dated Aug. 25, 2006) is 
the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless otherwise stated.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
reimburse them for the invalid referrals, I have agreed to do so, and [my 
company] and I are currently finalizing the details of my repayment plan.        
 
 The improper fee-splitting arrangement is the source of the security concern in 
Applicant’s case. Applicant’s employer had a program in which some employees 
received a fee or bonus for referring potential new employees that the contractor 
subsequently hired. Some managers, including Applicant’s supervisor S, were not 
eligible to receive these referral fees. S referred ten potential new employees to the 
contractor for employment; however, Applicant, who was eligible to receive the referral 
fees, received the credit and remuneration for the referrals. If two referrals were made 
within a 90 day period, then the contractor paid an additional bonus. Some referrals 
were timed to maximize the bonus. After Applicant paid taxes on the bonuses he 
received, he split the remainder of the referral fees with S.   
 
 In April 2006, allegations of improper fee-splitting arrangements surfaced and S 
resigned. On April 17, 2006, an investigator questioned Applicant about the fee-splitting 
arrangement, and Applicant lied about his culpability. On April 24, 2006, after being 
confronted with proof of the fee-splitting arrangement, Applicant admitted his 
involvement and resigned. He admitted that he initially lied because he “panicked.” See 
FORM and Applicant’s Response to FORM at 2.   
 
 Applicant and the contractor have been in negotiations for more than a year 
about repayment of the approximately $46,000 he improperly accepted for referrals he 
did not make. Applicant provided his first payment on March 12, 2008. See Applicant’s 
Response to FORM at 2. 
 
Applicant said he accepted full responsibility for his involvement in the fee-
splitting scheme. However, his acceptance of responsibility was equivocal. He said that 
S told him that management did not object to transfer of credit for referrals from one 
employee to another. Applicant also provided several examples where an employee 
received credit for referring new employees even though that employee did not actually 
refer the new employee to the contractor. It is unclear whether corporate management 
was aware of these referrals. In response to interrogatories, he explained that he was 
skeptical about S’ claim that management did not object to the fee-splitting arrangement 
stating: 
 
I exercised extremely poor judgment in this matter and truly regret 
my decisions.  I had enough reservations at the time to question my ex-
supervisor about the propriety of what we were doing. This alone should 
have told me that it wasn’t the right thing to do. However, I chose to hear 
what I wanted to hear and to believe that something that seemed to be too 
good to be true, was in fact true. Reassurances from my ex-supervisor, 
along with the fact that the money was being paid from Corporate without 
anyone saying anything, further reinforced my belief that it was OK.  After 
reflecting at length about this, I realized that what seemed to be 
harmless—I was told that Corporate put that money aside for recruiting, 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
and so it didn’t affect the Company’s profit—was actually more akin to 
taking something to which I was not entitled. 
 
Applicant emphasized that he has learned from his mistake, and has held a 
clearance for more than 20 years with no other incidents.  Because the personnel close 
to him are aware of the incident, it could not be used to coerce or improperly influence 
him.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
                                                          
6See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(b), 16(c) and 16(d) describe three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
                                                          
 
7“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and, (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
Applicant submitted false information about his role in referring employees to his 
employer and fraudulently obtained $46,000 from his employer. See SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant deliberately lied on April 17, 2006 to his employer’s investigator about his 
involvement in the improper fee-splitting scheme. See SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 16(b) applies to 
both situations.  However AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply to SOR ¶ 1.c because his failure to 
make restitution does not involve making false statements to his employer.8 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply because Applicant’s conduct is already 
covered under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct),9 and there is no need to resort to the 
catch-all provisions of Guideline E.  Alabama Criminal Code §13A-8-2(2) is the statute 
Applicant violated. He committed a theft when he knowingly obtained by deception 
control over the property of his employer, with the intent to deprive the owner of his or 
her property. Applicant knew he had done nothing to warrant payment of the fees, yet 
he affirmatively participated in obtaining the fees and then split the money with his co-
conspirator, S. The crime was repeated each time that he submitted a false statement 
or document to obtain the fee. As such, there is sufficient information “for an adverse 
determination” under Guideline J.   
 
 
                                                          
8In the decretal paragraph of this decision, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c. This 
finding does not suggest or imply that Applicant should not pay restitution or return the stolen funds. I do 
not condone his continued wrongful withholding of his employer’s funds. 
  
9AG ¶ 31 includes two conditions that could raise a security concern under Guideline J and may 
be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted” both clearly apply to Applicant’s conduct.   
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant made a false 
statement to his employer each time he submitted a false claim for payment of a referral 
fee, knowing he was not entitled to it. The theft was completed when he received the 
funds because he intended to permanently deprive his employer of the employer’s 
money. He lied to the corporate investigator in April 2006 when first confronted about 
the thefts. He continues to deprive his employer of the funds even after being caught in 
April 2006. His misconduct is recent.10 He did not promptly inform the government of the 
falsifications. He attempted to mislead his employer’s investigation. He did not receive 
                                                          
10 The falsifications cannot be considered in isolation or piecemeal. An administrative judge is 
required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency 
of his conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When all the falsifications are considered, the personal conduct cannot be 
mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c).  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
counseling designed to improve his conduct. Applicant’s attempt to convince security 
officials that he believed S when S told him management would not object to the fee-
splitting scheme is not credible. No one advised him to lie to the investigator. He 
admitted the false statements at issue, and the falsification allegations are all 
substantiated. His statement that he has learned from his mistakes does not convince 
me that similar misbehavior is unlikely to recur. His falsifications cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security concerns pertaining to 
his personal conduct are not mitigated. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
Applicant served honorably on active duty from 1978 to 1998. The contractor 
subsequently employed him until 2006, and there is no evidence of malfeasance 
beyond that alleged in the SOR. His record of good employment and military service 
(aside from the SOR allegations) weighs in his favor. This shows some responsibility 
and mitigation. 
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s misconduct is more substantial, and 
is thoroughly discussed under Guideline E, supra. Applicant’s decisions to steal from his 
employer and lie to the investigator were deliberate, intentional, knowledgeable, 
voluntary, and not isolated. He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his 
conduct. He did not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have a clear 
understanding about how to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in the 
misconduct. He has not made restitution, which reflects poorly on his rehabilitation. By 
its very nature, his misconduct calls into question his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules and regulations. I have persistent and serious doubts about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not met his burden of establishing that his 
misconduct will not recur. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to personal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
