 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07994 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 28, 
2006. On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 5, 2007; answered it on 
October 16, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received his request on October 17, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on November 30, 2007, and the case was assigned to me on December 10, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 7, 2008, setting the case for 
 
2 
 
 
February 28, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit 
(AX) A, which was admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the 
record open until March 10, 2008, to enable him to submit additional evidence.  
Applicant timely submitted AX B and C, and they were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s responses to AX B and C are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits I and II.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2008. 
The record closed on March 10, 2008. I received an email dated March 13, 2008, and 
marked it as AX D, but I did not admit it because it was untimely.  Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 6, a personal subject interview extracted from a 
report of investigation, without calling an authenticating witness as required by the 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, and he 
waived it (Tr. 23-25).   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations. His 
admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old systems engineer for a federal contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since May 2006.  He attended college for two years but 
did not receive a degree (Tr. 7-8). He served in the U.S. Navy from March 1986 to 
March 2006, retiring as a chief petty officer (pay grade E-7). He served as an alcohol 
counselor in the Navy for a total of about six years (Tr. 43, 71). He has held a clearance 
since March 1995. 
 
 Applicant has been married since February 1987. He has two daughters, ages 19 
and 17, and a 14-year-old son. His children live with him at home (Tr. 53). 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol while in college. While in the Navy, he 
usually consumed wine or beer on weekends with dinner (GX 4 at 2).  His normal 
consumption was three or four drinks at a sitting (Tr. 76). He believed that it took about 
five or six drinks to make him intoxicated (GX 6 at 2).   
 
 In October 2001, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of 
alcohol (GX 5 at 3), after he drove across the center of the road into incoming traffic and 
hit two cars (Tr. 55). He testified he had consumed “at least four” mixed drinks (Tr. 55). 
His breathalyzer test showed a blood-alcohol level above 2.0 (Tr. 56). He admitted he 
was doing “a lot of drinking” during that period (Tr. 58). He testified the incident occurred 
because he was using alcohol to relieve severe back pain and depression (Answer to 
 
3 
 
 
SOR; Tr. 42-43). He was convicted and sentenced to a fine of $150, his driver’s license 
was suspended for 90 days, and he was required to attend a driver retraining course.  
He did not seek counseling or report the incident to his military unit, for fear of 
jeopardizing his career (Tr. 57). 
 
Some time in 2004, Applicant had an argument with his wife and oldest daughter, 
after the children returned late from a movie and came home with friends without 
notifying their parents. His wife called the military police, and his commander imposed a 
military protection order (Tr. 54, 69-70). The family argument was not alcohol-related. 
 
Applicant was upset by his family situation, and, in March 2005, after living 
separately from his family for 5-6 months, he consumed alcohol to the point of 
intoxication while flying home from a duty assignment (Answer to SOR; Tr. 45). He 
testified he began drinking at the departure airport, consumed “a little alcohol” on the 
aircraft, and went to a bar after his flight landed (Tr. 58-59). He admitted he was 
impaired “to a certain point” by his alcohol consumption (Tr. 60). He was stopped by 
police after he crossed over the center line of the road. He failed a field sobriety test and 
refused a breathalyzer test (Tr. 59-60). He was charged with refusal to take the 
breathalyzer test. At his trial, he pleaded no contest and voluntarily disclosed his 
previous alcohol-related conviction to the judge (Tr. 46). He was sentenced to a fine of 
$1,175, 20 hours of community service, and suspension of his driver’s license for four 
months. He also was ordered to complete an alcohol treatment program (GX 4 at 5). He 
received nonjudicial punishment from his military commander for drunk driving, but the 
punishments were suspended (Tr. 66, 79). He went to sea about a week later, believing 
that a court official would contact him about his community service (Tr. 46). He made no 
inquiries about scheduling his community service. 
 
 Applicant was screened for substance abuse by the Navy in October 2001 and 
May 2005 and diagnosed as not dependant on both occasions (GX 1 at 27). After his 
arrest in March 2005, he decided to continue drinking moderately, limiting himself to two 
or three glasses of wine at dinner (GX 6 at 1-2). 
 
After Applicant retired in March 2006, he was unable to obtain a driver’s license 
because he had not completed his community service. He finally completed it in 
January-February 2007 (AX A; Answer to SOR). He decided to stop drinking, and had 
his last drink on July 3, 2007, when he consumed three beers (GX 4 at 3). He began 
alcohol abuse treatment with a licensed clinical social worker on July 19, 2007, to 
comply with the court order requiring him to complete an alcohol treatment program (GX 
4 at 4-5).   
 
By the time of the hearing, Applicant had met with the social worker about ten 
times (Tr. 68), but his treatment had not been completed because of his frequent, work-
related travel. He was continuing to abstain from alcohol and had attended to Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings within two weeks of the hearing (Tr. 64). He did not have an 
AA sponsor, but he relied on his pastor for counseling and support (Tr. 51, 72; AX B at 
2). His social worker recommended that his initial participation in AA become “sustained 
 
4 
 
 
and committed” and that he establish a relationship with a sponsor to improve the 
likelihood that he will maintain sobriety after the treatment is completed (AX B at 3).  
Applicant testified his social worker believed he should stop drinking entirely because 
otherwise it would only be a matter of time before there was another incident (Tr. 83). 
 
Applicant’s direct supervisor for the past two years testified that Applicant works 
without direct supervision, travels frequently, and is on the road 20-30 percent of the 
time. He described Applicant as dependable, trustworthy, and demonstrating a lot of 
initiative (Tr. 30). Clients have frequently sent unsolicited feedback about Applicant’s 
performance, and it has been uniformly very positive (Tr. 37-38). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The SOR alleges an arrest and conviction for driving under the influence in 
October 2001 (¶ 1.a), an arrest and conviction for refusing a breathalyzer test in March 
2005 (¶ 1.b), and commencement of alcohol counseling in July 2007 (¶ 1.c). The 
security concern relating to Guideline G is set out in AG & 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
 
A disqualifying condition may arise from “alcohol-related incidents away from 
work, such as driving while under the influence . . , regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(a). Applicant’s two 
alcohol-related convictions raise this potentially disqualifying condition. 
 
A disqualifying condition also may arise from “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. AG ¶ 22(c). “Binge drinking” is 
“the consumption of five or more drinks in a row on at least one occasion.”  U.S. Dept. 
of Health & Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, The  National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Binge Drinking Among 
Underage Persons, Apr. 11, 2002, available at http://www.oas.samhsa.gov.  Applicant’s 
admission that he consumed “at least four” mixed drinks before the October 2001 
incident and was drinking “a lot” during this period strongly suggests habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol. Although the evidence is not conclusive on this point, it is more 
than a scintilla and enough to be “substantial evidence.” I conclude AG ¶ 22(c) is raised.  
 
6 
 
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by an “evaluation of alcohol abuse 
or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program.” AG ¶ 22(f). The evaluation of alcohol abuse by 
the licensed clinical social worker who is treating Applicant raises this disqualifying 
condition. 
Finally, a disqualifying condition may arise from “failure to follow any court order 
regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.” AG ¶ 22(g).  
Although Applicant was ordered in early 2005 to obtain treatment for alcohol abuse, he 
did not begin his treatment until July 2007, more than two years later. I conclude AG ¶ 
22(g) is raised. 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 22(a), (c), (f), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns arising from alcohol consumption may be mitigated if “so much 
time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” AG ¶ 23(a). Even though 
Applicant’s last incident was more than three years ago, the first prong (“so much time 
has passed”) is not established, because the record reflects habitual alcohol abuse 
before the October 2001 incident, an unsuccessful effort to moderate his drinking after 
that incident, and failure to seek court-ordered treatment for more than two years after 
his conviction in March 2005. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established, 
because his first alcohol-related conviction was preceded by frequent alcohol abuse, 
and he failed to moderate his drinking after his first conviction. The third prong (“unusual 
circumstances”) is not established, because the circumstances of his alcohol abuse 
were not unusual. The fourth prong (“unlikely to recur”) is not established, because he 
has not completed his alcohol abuse treatment and his social worker believes he needs 
to do more with AA to improve the likelihood of continued sobriety.  Finally, his alcohol 
consumption casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
because he continued to abuse alcohol after his first life-threatening incident, engaged 
in similar behavior in March 2005, and did not begin the court-ordered alcohol-abuse 
treatment for more than two years. I conclude that AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. 
Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of 
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if 
alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG¶ 23(b).  Applicant has 
acknowledged his alcohol abuse and is undergoing treatment. However, he has 
concluded that his efforts at responsible use are risky, and his social worker has 
concurred.  His abstinence for seven months (as of the date of the hearing) is not long 
 
7 
 
 
enough to establish a new “pattern,” when considered in the context of his record of 
alcohol abuse.  I conclude AG ¶ 23(b) is not established. 
Security concerns based on alcohol consumption may be mitigated if “the 
individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment 
program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress.” AG ¶ 23(c). Although Applicant was required to attend driver retraining 
classes after his first alcohol-related conviction, the classes were not an alcohol 
counseling or treatment program, and his second conviction was not a relapse in the 
sense of this mitigating condition. I conclude AG ¶ 23(c) is established. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if, 
the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
AG ¶ 23(d). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not 
completed his treatment program, has not yet complied with his social worker’s 
aftercare recommendations, and has not yet received a favorable diagnosis. 
 The SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant “began alcohol counseling” with a licensed 
clinical social worker. It does not allege a diagnosis. Standing alone, entering into 
alcohol counseling is not a disqualifying condition. To the contrary, the mitigating 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 23(b), (c), and (d) are premised on obtaining counseling or 
treatment.  I resolve SOR ¶ 1.c in Applicant’s favor. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges the same conduct alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. The 
concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶ 30. Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single serious crime 
or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶¶ 31(a). Applicant’s multiple convictions of alcohol-
related crimes raise this disqualifying condition, shifting the burden to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). For the reasons 
set out above regarding AG ¶ 23(a) under Guideline G, I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from criminal conduct also may be mitigated by 
“evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). Applicant had abstained from alcohol for seven months and appeared to be 
genuinely remorseful at the time of the hearing. He is well regarded by his supervisor. 
On the other hand, he has been reluctant to acknowledge his alcohol abuse. He was 
dilatory in carrying out his court-ordered community service, and he has not yet 
completed his alcohol abuse treatment. I conclude insufficient time has passed to 
determine whether he is rehabilitated.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent adult who held responsible positions in the Navy 
and has gained a good reputation in civilian life. He is the father of three children.  He 
has held a clearance for many years. However, even though he spent six years as an 
alcohol counselor in the Navy, he engaged in life-threatening behavior in October 2001 
and repeated it in March 2005, apparently not learning from his first experience. His 
dilatory approach to alcohol abuse treatment detracts from his expressions of remorse 
and statements of good intentions. Although he is a valuable employee with much to 
offer and has finally taken positive steps to avoid further alcohol abuse, he needs a 
longer track record of responsible behavior to carry his burden of showing his current 
 
9 
 
 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.37-E3.1.39 
(reconsideration authorized after one year). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
