 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06435 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alexander M. Laughling, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns arising from 
her relationship and contacts with Iranian citizens. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
September 4, 2007. On October 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1  
  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on November 16, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 
19, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 24, 2007. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on January 29, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 20).2 Applicant testified on her 
own behalf, and presented the testimony of one witness and six exhibits, marked AE 1 
through 6, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with 
explanations. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old business woman and entrepreneur. She was born, 
raised, and educated in Iran (Tr. 26). She received a bachelor’s degree in applied 
mathematics and a master’s degree in abstract mathematics in 1994 from an Iranian 
university (Tr. 120). Applicant had started another master’s degree in operations 
research, but was expelled in 1992 from the university before she completed her degree 
because she did not cover her face and hair as required by Islamic law (Tr. 25). While 
attending her master’s classes, Applicant also taught at the university.  
 
While studying in Iran, Applicant taught high school and college classes. After 
she completed her education, Applicant worked for an Iranian company managing and 
coordinating the construction of a mid-size airport (Tr. 28). She claimed the company 
was privately owned. 
 
Applicant married her Iranian-born spouse in 1988 in Iran (GE 1). He was a 
professor at the same Iranian university she attended. He attended college in the United 
States and had real estate investments in the United States (Tr. 121-122). In 1989, 
Applicant travelled to the United States for the first time with her then husband (Tr. 41). 
From 1989 to 1994, Applicant and her spouse lived in the United States during 
approximately six months each year, and travelled back to Iran and lived there for the 
remainder of the year (Tr. 121). She has an 18-year-old son born in Iran of this marriage 
(Tr. 23-24). He is soon to be sworn in as a U.S. naturalized citizen, and currently 
attends a U.S. university on a scholarship (Tr. 45). According to Applicant, her son has 
no Iranian friends, and is not a practicing Moslem. He does not have an Iranian 
passport and has never traveled to Iran.  
 
In 1994, Applicant emigrated to the United States with her husband and child. 
She divorced her spouse in 2000 in the United States (Tr. 76). Since their divorce, 
Applicant has little or no contact with her ex-spouse. Applicant became a U.S. 
naturalized citizen in 1997. She described her naturalization as an emotional event (Tr. 
2  GE 3 was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                     
42-44). She feels she belongs in the American society, and has had great support from 
her American friends. She claimed her social network of friends is composed primarily 
of U.S. citizens. She has limited contact with the Iranian community in the United 
States. Applicant believes in God, but testified she is not a religious person, and is not a 
practicing Moslem. She testified she has no property or any financial interests in Iran. 
Applicant has not travelled to Iran since 1994, and she stated her intent never to return 
to Iran (Tr. 51). 
 
In 2004, Applicant founded her own company in the United States and requires 
access to classified information to participate in promoting her company’s business and 
to qualify for contracts with the federal government (Tr. 26). She started working full 
time for her company in 2006. Applicant’s company has a facility’s top secret clearance 
(Tr. 108). Applicant had interim access to classified information for approximately seven 
months prior to her hearing (Tr. 26-28). Applicant’s company is a sub-contractor in 
several important contracts with U.S. government agencies. 
 
Applicant’s parent’s were born, raised and educated in Iran. They are Iranian 
citizens, and they live with Applicant when they are present in the United States (Tr. 46-
49). Her father is 72 years old. He was an engineer for an Iranian oil company. In that 
position, he supervised/managed approximately 100 employees (Tr 125, 133). He 
retired from his employment after 30 years of service. Initially, Applicant claimed not to 
know whether her father was receiving a pension from the government of Iran (Tr. 100-
101). Later she changed her testimony and clarified she believes her father receives a 
pension from the Iranian government (Tr. 116). Her mother completed high school, but 
was a homemaker for most of her life. Her parents would like to become U.S. citizens 
but are working to improve their English language ability (Answer).  
 
At the time of her hearing, Applicant’s parents were living in Iran. They left for 
Iran sometime prior to her hearing, and she believes they will spend approximately six 
months visiting their relatives in Iran (Tr. 105). Since 1999, her parents have been 
travelling back and forth each year between Iran and the United States. They spend 
close to half of each year living with Applicant in the United States. The remainder of the 
year they spend with their other children living in Iran (Tr. 97).3 While in the United 
States, Applicant’s parents have telephone contact with their relatives in Iran at least 
once every two weeks (Tr. 99). 
 
Applicant’s parents and her two sisters living in Iran jointly own an apartment 
building in Iran. She is not aware of the percentage of ownership between them (Tr. 49-
50). Her parents’ home was demolished so that her sisters and her husbands could 
build a new apartment building to live in. Her parents keep ownership of the land. Her 
parents have an apartment in the new apartment building.  
 
3  Applicant initially testified her parents were living permanently with her, and that they travelled 
to Iran every year, and stayed there visiting their relatives for a period of one to three months (Tr. 97). 
She later clarified that her parents stay in Iran for a period of four to six months every year (Tr. 126). 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has a 38-year-old sister living in the United States. She emigrated to 
the United States in 1999, and would like to become a U.S. naturalized citizen. She 
received an engineering degree in agriculture from an Iranian university. However, she 
is a homemaker. Applicant’s sister’s husband was born in Iran. Applicant believes he 
became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 2007 (Tr. 127). Applicant’s sister has traveled to 
Iran approximately every other year since 1999, and stays in Iran for approximately one 
month during her visits (Tr. 54, 104). The last time she visited Iran was in 2006 (Tr. 
105). She has no financial interests or property in Iran. She provides charitable 
contributions to an orphanage in Iran (Tr. 56). According to Applicant, her sister has no 
intention to go back to live in Iran (Tr. 56).  
 
Applicant has three siblings living in Iran who are citizens and residents of Iran. 
Her two sisters were rejected from medical school because they attended a combined 
gender school in violation of Islamic law (Tr. 64). They both graduated from mid-wife 
school (Tr. 57). Both sisters are married to practicing physicians and have never been 
to the United States. They live in an apartment building owned by them and their 
parents. Applicant does not know the frequency of her telephonic contact with her 
sisters (Tr. 68). She has unscheduled telephonic contact with her sisters – sometimes 
they talk once a week, sometimes once a month. Applicant never corresponds with her 
sisters via e-mail or written correspondence because she is concerned about the Iranian 
government monitoring their communications (Tr. 60). Both of her sisters would like to 
emigrate to the United States (Tr. 64). They also contribute financially to the same 
Iranian orphanage her sister in the United States sponsors (Tr. 63). 
 
Applicant’s brother is 41 years old, and married. He is an architect by profession 
and owns his own private consulting firm. Applicant believes he does not have any ties 
to the Iranian government (Answer). He served in the Iranian Army for approximately 
one and one-half year (Tr. 130). She has contact with her brother approximately once a 
year during the New Year holidays (Tr. 72). 
 
Applicant claimed that none of her relatives in Iran, including her parents and 
siblings, have ever asked her about her work, and that they have no knowledge of what 
she does for a living (Tr. 50). Only her sister living in the United States is aware 
Applicant is applying for access to classified information (GE 2). She testified that none 
of her relatives in Iran have any current political difficulties with the Iranian government. 
Her relatives do not work for or have any business relationship with the Iranian 
government, and they are not involved in any social or political organization. She 
claimed her siblings are hostile to the current Iranian government. All of her relatives 
have philosophical objections to the current Iranian government. 
 
Applicant considers herself a loyal American. She believes the United States has 
the best constitution in the world, and that the United States should act as the “father of 
the world” (Tr. 89). She promised to report any inquiries about her work and/or any 
possible threat against the United States from any foreigners, U.S. citizens, or from her 
family members (Tr. 90-94). She also promised to protect classified information even it 
her doing so would be the downfall of her business or her family (Tr. 93). She also 
 
5 
 
 
promised to promote the interest of the United States (Tr. 90), and to do anything she 
could to overcome the Iranian government (Tr. 94).  
 
Applicant claimed she would not go back to Iran for any reason, including a sick 
family member or the death of a family member (Tr. 91). In her answer to the SOR, she 
stated that “[she] simply do not attach any overriding significance to relationships based 
solely on blood of family ties.” She believes she would place herself at risk if she were 
to go back to Iran because of her protests against the Iranian government while she 
was attending college (Tr. 92). She participated in two protests against the Iranian 
government when it intended to close schools for four years, and to force women to 
cover their hair and faces (Tr. 95-96). In 1992, she was expelled for one year from the 
university (GE 2). 
 
In January 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a government background 
investigator. During the interview she disclosed trips in 2006 to Dubai (twice) and India 
where she met with foreign nationals trying to develop her company’s business. During 
these trips, she met with numerous foreign nationals with whom she maintains 
infrequent telephone contact. Applicant was not sure whether she had properly reported 
her contacts with foreign nationals (GE 2). One of her sisters traveled from Iran to Dubai 
to meet with Applicant during one of her trips. 
 
Applicant received solid recommendations from her colleagues in business, 
friends, and past supervisors (AE 1c-e). She is considered to be a hard-working, ethical, 
and dedicated employee. In general, she is perceived as being highly professional and 
honest. She is trustworthy, dependable, and committed to principles of freedom and 
democracy. Her references recommended her for a security clearance. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Iran is a “theocratic Islamic 
republic in which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures.” Iran engages 
in clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD) in defiance of the International community, sponsors international 
terrorism, intervenes in the internal affairs of Iraq, is arming terrorists in Iraq, 
undermines the Middle East peace process, and violates the human rights of the Iranian 
people. The United States and its allies are attempting to block Iran’s goals of obtaining 
nuclear weapons and other WMD and to counter Iran’s efforts to destabilize Iraq and 
other the Middle East countries.  
 
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. The United States is 
concerned about the possibility that terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran. 
Iran supports terrorists who attack Israel and Shiite militias who pursue sectarian 
violence in Iraq. Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, should carefully consider the 
risks of travel in Iran because they are still considered Iranian citizens by Iranian 
authorities. Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. The Iranian government has 
harassed and detained dual citizens of the United States and Iran. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and, 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
 
8 
 
 
                                                     
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.6 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with her parents and siblings. Her parents and 
siblings are citizens and residents of Iran (except one of her sisters who is a U.S. 
resident). Her parents live with Applicant when they live in the United States. The 
closeness of the relationship is shown by Applicant’s frequent telephone contacts with 
her siblings. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Iranian agents or terrorists may exploit the 
opportunity to obtain information about the United States. Her connection to her family 
members also creates a potential conflict of interest because her relationships are 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about her desire to help them by providing 
sensitive or classified information.  
 
These close relationships create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because Iran and the United States’ relationship is far from 
friendly. Her connections to her Iranian family also create a potential conflict of interest 
because her relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about her 
desire to help her family by providing sensitive information. Applicant’s relationship with 
her parents creates a “heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or 
coercion” because they return to Iran every year for an extended period and could be 
subjected to Iranian pressure. 
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
6  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that only mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant has not traveled to Iran since 1994, and she became a U.S. naturalized 
citizen in 1997. She has contacts and close relationships with her parents and sister 
living in the United States who are citizens of Iran. Applicant also has contacts and 
close relationship with her siblings who are residents and citizens of Iran. Her sister 
living in the United States travels every other year to Iran and stays there with her 
relatives for approximately one month. Her parents have lived with Applicant since 
1999, and they have traveled to Iran every year since 1999. They lived approximately 
half of each year in Iran and the other half of the year in the United States. They travel 
to Iran to visit their children and relatives living in Iran.  
 
Guideline ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. Appellant did not establish “it is unlikely 
[she] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of [her 
Iranian family] and the interests of the U.S.” Her frequent contacts and close 
relationships with her Iranian family members could potentially force her to choose 
between the United States and Iran. She did not meet her burden of showing there is 
“little likelihood that [her relationships with her Iranian family members] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
The nature of Iran’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. The hostility of Iran 
to the United States places a “very heavy burden of persuasion” on Applicant to 
demonstrate that her immediate family members in Iran (visiting or living in Iran) do not 
pose a security risk and she will not be placed into a position to be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and her Iranian family members.7 With its 
adversarial stance and its negative human rights record, it is likely that Iran would target 
any citizen in an attempt to gather classified or sensitive information from the United 
States. 
 
Applicant testified she was expelled twice from an Iranian university for protesting 
actions by the Iranian government, and that her sisters were barred from medical school 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) (stating an applicant has “a very 
heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when parents and siblings live in Iran).  
See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very heavy burden” 
standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran).   
 
10 
 
 
because they attended mixed gender schools. To a certain extent, her family members 
living in Iran, and her parents, have challenged the policies of the Iranian government. 
Thus, it is more likely the Iranian government is monitoring her parents’ and sister’s trips 
to Iran, as well as all their communications. On the other hand, there is no evidence that 
any of her relatives work for the Iranian government or military or any news media. 
There is no evidence that the Iranian government has approached any of her Iranian 
family for any reason, and in particular, has not approached them recently about 
Applicant. There is no evidence that her family living in Iran currently engages in 
activities which would bring attention to themselves or that they are even aware of her 
work.  
 
Notwithstanding, Foreign Influence mitigating conditions cannot be applied in this 
case, and the security concerns cannot be fully mitigated because there is no reason for 
Iran to contact her relatives about Applicant until she receives access to classified 
information. Even taking for granted that her family members currently have low-key 
non-controversial lifestyles, and that the Iranian government has not contacted them 
about Applicant in the past, such factors are insufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns because of the nature of the Iranian government and its relationship to the 
United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the United States, that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States’ interests. She has lived in the United States for 
approximately 14 years. She is a naturalized U.S. citizen and all of her financial and 
business interests are in the United States. Applicant has established herself as an 
American citizen and a successful business woman (Tr. 149). She has worked hard for 
numerous employers in the United States, and she continues this track record of diligent 
labor in the development of her company. Although this mitigating condition is 
applicable, it is insufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant strongly averred her loyalty to the United States, that she feels like an 
American, her desire to help the United States against any possible enemies, and her 
desire to help the United States to overcome the current Iranian government. Applicant 
has lived in the United States for 14 years and has been a naturalized citizen for 11 
years. When she became a U.S. citizen, she swore allegiance to the United States. Her 
son is also a U.S. citizen, and her parents and one of her sisters are U.S. residents.  
 
Notwithstanding, her parents travelled to Iran and have lived in Iran for 
approximately six months of every year since 1999. Her sister travels to Iran every other 
year and stays in Iran for approximately one month. Applicant has strong ties of 
affection and or obligation to her parents and siblings, including those in Iran. Because 
her family members travel to Iran and live in Iran for long periods of time, they are 
vulnerable to coercion or exploitation by a foreign power. Applicant’s statement about 
her loyalty to the United States is credible, and there is no reason to believe that she 
would take any action which could cause potential harm to her U.S. family or to this 
country.  
 
There is no evidence she has ever taken any action which could cause potential 
harm to the United States, or that he lacks honesty and integrity. She credibly stated 
that she takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously. She has the respect and 
trust of her business partners, her friends, and family. There is no evidence that she has 
revealed to her family in Iran the nature of her work or about applying for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Numerous circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. 
Iran is seeking WMD and Iran’s government is currently in an adversarial position with 
respect to the United States. More importantly for security purposes, Iran seeks 
sensitive or protected U.S. information. Applicant had significant connections to Iran 
before she immigrated to the United States in 1994. She was born in Iran and educated 
in Iranian universities. Likely, the Iranian government is aware of her protests during her 
university days and monitors Applicant’s and her family communications. She has family 
members who are Iranian citizens living in Iran, and her parents and sister in the United 
States travel to and stay in Iran for long periods of time. Applicant has frequent and non-
casual contact with her family members living in Iran. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Iranian agents or terrorists may attempt to use Applicant’s family members living in Iran 
to obtain information about the United States.  
 
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
 
12 
 
 
1990).  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference. The evidence leaves me with doubts 
as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the concerns 
arising from her foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
