  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-05800
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 29, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems and Guideline E for personal conduct based on falsification of a
security-clearance application. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided
against Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 Directive, ¶ 2.2 (By mutual agreement, the Directive extends to other federal agencies, to include NASA).3
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on December 3, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2008. The hearing took place as
scheduled on March 13, 2008, and the transcript (Tr.) was received on March 21, 2008.
Applicant presented no documentary evidence at the hearing. Therefore, the
record was left open until March 28, 2008, to provide him an opportunity to do so.
Applicant timely submitted matters, which were forwarded by department counsel who
made no objections. The post-hearing matters are admitted as follows: (1) Exhibit
A–IRS documentation; and (2) Exhibit B–statements for Visa credit card account.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges multiple delinquent debts (¶ 1.a–¶ 1.j)
ranging from $100 to $8,982 for about $90,000 in total. His response to the SOR is
mixed, admitting and denying various debts. Under Guideline E, he admits the
allegations that he made deliberately false statements when answering two questions
about his financial record on a security-clearance application. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 61-year-old security guard who works for a company that provides
security services to an NASA facility.  He has worked as a security guard at the same3
NASA facility since 1978, initially part-time and then full-time since 1980. During his
years as a security guard he has worked in positions of authority such as key-control
clerk and dispatcher. He currently earns about $13 per hour. His educational
background includes completing high school and two years of junior college. 
Applicant has been married since 1972. His wife is now 56 years old. They have
lived at the same residence since 1973. They have two adult children, ages 27 and 24,
and one grandchild. His wife was employed throughout their marriage until about 1994
when she was injured, had surgery, and was unable to work. She received disability
insurance until she was adjudicated as disabled for social security purposes in about
1998. Since then, she has received disability payments and she currently receives
about $1,500 monthly.  
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems. For example, a January 2007 credit
report shows 17 of 49 accounts in the trade section of the report have some sort of
derogatory information; the report also shows 6 accounts in the collections section
(Exhibit 2). The delinquent debts in the SOR are established by the credit reports
(Exhibits 2, 4, and 5). He has not contacted any of the creditors in the SOR. Nor has he
paid, settled, or resolved any of the debts in the SOR. In general, he plans to pay the
debts off and will do so by starting with the smallest debt and working his way up (Tr.
32–33). 
He has, however, resolved two other matters. The first was an outstanding debt
owed to the IRS for tax year 2004 (Exhibit A). He entered into an installment agreement
with the IRS with a beginning balance of about $1,400, and he completed his payments
during 2006–2007. The second was a Visa credit card account with a credit union that
had a balance of about $1,900 (Exhibit B). Beginning in February 2007, he made
several monthly payments of various amounts resulting in a zero balance by December
2007. In addition, about three to four years ago, he refinanced his home mortgage and
took out about $25,000 in equity. He used the money to make payments to various
creditors. 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his wife’s inability to work and the
loss of her salary. His wife was earning about $55,000 annually and their lifestyle and
debts were based on two incomes (Exhibit 3). He attempted to remedy this situation
with a second job as a security guard. He worked full-time at two jobs for about three
years until his own health problems forced him to stop in November 2007.
In his testimony, he estimated having about $400 in the bank. Also, he estimated
a $5,300 balance in a 401(k) account. Aside from his house, that is the totality of his
financial assets. He had no idea of how much money his wife has, as they handle their
money separately, including responsibility for paying bills.
Applicant completed a security-clearance application in December 2006 (Exhibit
1). When signing the application, he certified that his statements were true, complete,
and correct to the best on his knowledge and belief and were made in good faith, and
he acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement could be punished under
federal law. In particular, he answered two questions about his financial record as
follows:
• Question 28a–asking if in the last seven years he had been over 180-days
delinquent on any debts, to which he replied “no” and did not disclose any debts;
and 
• Question 28b–asking if he was currently over 90-days delinquent on any debts,
to which he replied “no” and did not disclose any debts. 
He gave negative answers to the two questions because he knew his job was on the
line and he was trying to keep it (Tr. 71). 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes6
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order7
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting8
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An9
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate10
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme11
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating15
conditions under Guideline F). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 16
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 17
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 18
 MC 2 is “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g.,19
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically15
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be16
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations17 18
within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more than sufficient to
establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F have been considered and none
apply. Two deserve discussion. First, MC 2—conditions largely beyond a person’s
control—does not apply.  The injury and disability of Applicant’s wife were factors that19
led to the financial problems. This circumstance reduced the family’s income and
 MC 4 is “ the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”20
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating21
conditions under Guideline E).  
 Revised Guidelines at p. 10.22
6
strained the family budget. The MC does not apply, however, because Applicant did not
act reasonably under the circumstances. Much time has passed since his wife’s injury
(1994) and her adjudication of disability (1998), and this should have been sufficient
time to adjust. Although some slippage could be expected and tolerated under the
circumstances, it appears Applicant and his wife did not make the necessary
adjustments to their lifestyle in light of their reduced income. That is not reasonable
conduct under the circumstances.   
Second, a potential mitigating condition is MC 4, which requires a person to
initiate a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  He20
has taken some positive steps to resolve his financial problems as evidenced by paying
off the IRS and the Visa credit card account noted above. But his efforts, in light of the
remaining unaddressed financial problems, are not enough to qualify as a good-faith
effort. 
Although Applicant’s stated intent is to resolve his financial problems, he has
done little so far to demonstrate his intent. What is missing here is: (1) a realistic and
workable plan to clean up his financial house; (2) documented actions taken in
furtherance of the plan; and (3) a measurable improvement to the situation. Given the
current circumstances, it is likely that the financial problems will continue or recur
because he is facing a mountain of financial problems. Accordingly, Guideline F is
decided against Applicant. 
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and21
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to “[c]onduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations [that may] raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”22
The SOR alleges that Applicant made false statements when providing answers
to two questions about his financial record when he completed a security-clearance
application. He admitted giving false answers in his reply to the SOR, and he explained
in his hearing testimony that he did so in an attempt to keep his job. Taken together, the
circumstances show Applicant was trying to hide his financial problems. This situation
 DC 1 is the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security23
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness,
or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
7
raises a security concern and falls squarely within DC 1,  which includes the deliberate23
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from a security questionnaire. 
All of the mitigating conditions under Guideline E have been considered and
none apply. His explanation—he wanted to keep his job—may be an understandable
sentiment, but it is not an acceptable explanation in extenuation or mitigation. Making
false statements during the security clearance process is serious misconduct, and it is
not easily explained away, extenuated, or mitigated. Applicant has not presented
sufficient evidence to do so. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support
a favorable decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
