 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06587 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct and alcohol consumption. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
On November 1, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 19, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on March 17, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 21, 2008, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on April 7, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until April 21, 2008, to submit additional matters.  
Applicant submitted a fax cover sheet and three letters, which were marked AE C 
through F, and received without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The record closed on April 21, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 22, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanations, with the exception of ¶ 2.a, which he denied. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never been 
married and has no children. He is a high school graduate with some community college 
classes.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in a state other than where he lived on March 21, 1993, 
and charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI). He pled no contest and was fined 
$1,428, ordered to spend 48 hours in jail, and ordered to attend an alcohol education 
class. In 1996, a bench warrant was issued for his failure to complete confinement, 
failure to enroll in an alcohol education class, and failure to pay his fine. Applicant did 
not resolve this matter until January 24, 2003, when he returned to the court. He paid 
his fine, served one day in jail, and was permitted to complete his alcohol class in his 
state of residence. He attended classes at a counseling center two times per week for 
three months between February and May 2003. He was apparently diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser. The credentials of the individual who diagnosed the Applicant were not 
provided.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested in his state of residence on March 11, 2000, and charged 
with DUI. He was given two breath tests and registered .195% and .190% blood alcohol 
content (BAC). He pled guilty to the amended charge of reckless driving. He was fined 
$490 plus fees, and ordered to attend DUI School and a Victim Impact Panel.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 45; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-26; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 22; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 On August 8, 2002, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons which included 
security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, based upon Applicant’s two 
DUIs. Applicant returned to the court to address his first DUI on January 24, 2003, four 
days before his DOHA hearing on January 28, 2003.4 Applicant was granted a security 
clearance by the Administrative Judge on March 28, 2003.5 
 
 Applicant works at a U.S. Government site away from where he lives. He works 
four ten-hour days per week, Monday through Thursday, or Tuesday through Friday. 
When he is working he stays at the job site, where temporary lodging is provided. He 
arrives at the site the morning of the first work day and goes home after work on the 
fourth day. The site has facilities such as a gym and a bar. On seven occasions 
between March and June 2005, Applicant left work early without authorization on the 
last day of the work week. He submitted incorrect time sheets that listed that he worked 
a complete week. His company issued Applicant a letter of reprimand in July 2005 for 
these actions. Applicant estimated that he left about an hour early on each occasion. He 
repaid the company for seven hours of salary.6   
 
 In about June 2006, Applicant was directed by his foreman to dump fluid into one 
of the inactive waste water treatment ponds on the facility that was dry. He dumped 
about 300 gallons of fluid into an active pond, which created a potential environmental 
hazard. Applicant did not intentionally dump the fluid into the wrong pond; he had not 
paid sufficient attention to what the foreman wanted him to do. He received a letter of 
reprimand in July 2006, and was suspended two days without pay.7   
 
 In January 2007, Applicant was involved in an incident with two co-workers at the 
work site. They were drinking in a dorm room and began roughhousing and wrestling. At 
some point his co-workers told him that it was getting late and that he should leave. 
Applicant refused to leave and there was some pushing involved. Applicant called 
security at 911 stating he was in fear of being assaulted by the two other men. Security 
took a report and escorted Applicant back to his room. After the incident he remained 
cordial with his two co-workers.8 
 
 Applicant was issued a letter of reprimand from his supervisor for the above 
incident. His supervisor asked him to voluntarily seek alcohol rehabilitation through his 
employer’s Employee Assistance Program. He was told that if he had any more alcohol-
                                                          
4 The SOR alleges that the hearing took place on January 23, 2003. The transcript of that hearing 
and the decision both clearly state that the hearing took place on January 28, 2003. 
 
5 Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 11, 12. 
 
6 Tr. at 38-40, 4-9; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 40-43; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 19, 27-28; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
related incidents that he would be terminated. Applicant chose not to avail himself of 
alcohol rehabilitation as he does not believe that he has an alcohol problem.9 He stated: 
 
I mean I get up to work every morning, I show up to work shaven, clean; I 
don’t show up to work with alcohol on my breath; I don’t need a drink the 
first thing in the morning; I don’t need a drink every day; I don’t drink 
heavy booze.10 
 
 Applicant will usually have at least a couple of beers almost every day. He will 
occasionally have a few beers after work when he is working at the Government site. 
Very rarely he will have a shot of tequila from a small bottle that he keeps in his freezer 
at the site. He will have about six beers on the night he gets home from the work site. 
He testified that he can drink about a twelve pack of beer on his days off. Applicant is a 
regular churchgoer and he stated that he does not go to church “hung over or smelling 
like booze.”11 
 
 Applicant submitted several character letters from a co-worker, a friend, and the 
pastor at his church. The co-worker described him as a hard worker, knowledgeable in 
his craft, dependable, rarely misses a day of work, and he gets along with his co-
workers in work situations and personally. His friend stated Applicant always treats 
others with respect and he can be counted on. His pastor wrote that he is trustworthy, 
industrious, and friendly.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 31-33; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
10 Tr. at 33. 
 
11 Tr. at 34-38, 44, 46-47; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 5. 
 
12 AE C-F. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment.  
 
 Applicant left work early without authorization on seven occasions in 2005. He 
intentionally submitted incorrect time sheets that listed hours that he did not work. This 
dishonest behavior is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(d) as credible adverse information that 
is not explicitly covered under any other guideline, but which supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also raises AG ¶ 16(e) as 
personal conduct that could affect Applicant’s personal, professional, and community 
standing. There was no specific evidence that it was in violation of a written or recorded 
 
7 
 
commitment made by Applicant to his employer as a condition of employment. AG ¶ 
16(f) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not pay sufficient attention to what his foreman wanted him to do 
and he dumped about 300 gallons of fluid into an active pond, which created a potential 
environmental incident. While unintentional, it was poor judgment and raises AG ¶ 
16(d). Applicant’s alcohol-related incident and calling 911 on his co-workers is sufficient 
to raise AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s time sheet incident occurred in 2005. He fully admitted the behavior 
and repaid the salary he dishonestly received from his company. AG ¶ 16(e) is a factor 
for consideration for that conduct. The dumping was a one-time incident and 
unintentional. AG ¶ 16(c) is applicable to that conduct. Applicant’s alcohol-related 
incident is also alleged under Guideline G. It raised concerns under Guideline E as 
personal conduct that could affect Applicant’s personal, professional, and community 
standing. Applicant is once again on good terms with the two co-workers. This has 
reduced Applicant’s vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable to that conduct.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 
8 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.  
 
Applicant’s drinking habits, DUIs, and alcohol-related incidents are sufficient to 
raise AG ¶¶ 22(a)-(c). Applicant admitted to being diagnosed as an alcohol abuser. No 
reports from the counseling center were submitted as evidence. The credentials of the 
individual who diagnosed the Applicant were not provided. The Appeal Board has stated 
that an Administrative Judge should take an expansive view of what constitutes a duly 
qualified medical professional and a licensed clinical social worker:  
 
ACDC 22(d) and (e) contemplate a broad range of providers who, by 
education and by position, are qualified to diagnose and treat alcohol 
dependence and other substance abuse disorders. By its own terms, ¶ 
22(d) lists the previously mentioned types of care providers by way of 
example only.13  
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). 
 
 
9 
 
In the case cited by the Appeal Board, the official in question held licenses in counseling 
and in the treatment of substance abuse and was the Director of a substance abuse 
counseling center.14 No such information is available in the instant case. Even under the 
expansive view directed by the Appeal Board, I am unable to find sufficient credible 
evidence to find AG ¶¶ 22(d) or (e) directly applicable. Applicant’s failure to attend the 
alcohol education class as ordered by the court in 1993, until 2003, raises AG ¶ 22(g).  
 
Applicant went to a security clearance hearing for his two DUIs and the 
Administrative Judge granted Applicant a security clearance. This does not raise any 
independent disqualifying condition under Guideline G. SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.f are 
concluded for Applicant. He did not take his supervisor’s advice to voluntarily seek 
alcohol rehabilitation through his employer’s Employee Assistance Program after his 
last alcohol-related incident. That also does not raise any specific disqualifying condition 
under Guideline G. SOR ¶ 2.h is concluded for Applicant.15  
 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant had a DUI in 1993. He did not complete the requirements of his 
conviction because it occurred in another state. He had another DUI in 2000. He finally 
                                                          
14 Id. 
 
15 The facts in this paragraph do not raise a disqualifying condition but will be considered when 
applying mitigating conditions and in analyzing the whole person. 
 
10 
 
addressed his 1993 conviction in 2003, when his security clearance hearing was 
imminent. He had another alcohol-related incident in January 2007. Applicant continues 
to drink regularly and sometimes excessively. None of the mitigating conditions are 
totally applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had DUIs in 1993 and 
2000. He refused to complete the requirements of his 1993 sentence until it became an 
issue for his security clearance. He committed timecard fraud on seven occasions in 
2005. He had another alcohol-related incident in 2007. He continues to drink regularly 
and at times excessively. I also considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Personal 
Conduct and Alcohol Consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
