                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-07278
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 7, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 3, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 20, 2008.  A hearing was held on February 20, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of six exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits.
The transcript (R.T.) was received on February 28, 2008.  Based upon a review of the
2
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated eight delinquent debts
exceeding $27,000.00: specifically, four consumer debts exceeding $11,000.00, a
student loan debt of $1,710.00, back child support totaling $8,841.00, a military credit
union account of $4,112.00, and an IRS debt for taxes owed in the amount of
$1,600.00. Applicant admitted the alleged debts with explanations.  He claimed to be
making monthly payments on three of his consumer debts and his IRS debt.  He
claimed to have paid his alleged back child support and will try to address the remaining
two debts. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Appellant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of the status of his admitted debts (including payment history
on his back child support and taxes owed to the IRS).  For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted seven days to supplement the record.  The Government was afforded
three days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record
with a running balance of his back child support payments and a prior billings
transactions statement, which Applicant claims to reference his payment history with a
certain creditor named in the SOR.  Department Counsel did not object to either of
Applicant’s two submissions, but noted that the prior billings statement contains different
account numbers for the creditor identified by Applicant in his submission.  Applicant’s
exhibits are admitted as exhibits A and B, and will be assigned the appropriate weight
they warrant.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old electronics technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married his first wife (W1) in April 1992 and divorced her in December
1999 (ex. 1).   He has two children from this marriage (ages 14 and 15) who reside with
their mother.  Applicant remarried (W2) in 2001 and has no children from this marriage.
He has recently separated from W2 (R.T., at 46).
Following his second DuI offense in 1995, Applicant’s security clearance was
revoked, in October 1997.  Records reflect that he received a general discharge for
misconduct after his security clearance was revoked (see exs. 2 and 3; R.T., at 37).
Applicant successfully completed an alcohol and drug rehabilitation program in February
1999 (see ex. 3), and remained in the military until January 2000 (R.T., at 37-38).
3
Applicant acknowledges to have lived beyond his means somewhat while
married to W1 (R.T., at 47-48).  Unable to find work after his exit from the Army in 2000,
he fell behind with a number of his debts.  Records report that he accumulated a
number of delinquent consumer debts between 1997 and 2004, attributable to his
divorce.  His delinquent debts covered in his credit reports include four consumer
accounts exceeding $11,000.00 (including a deficiency balance on a repossessed
vehicle in the amount of $5,710.00, back child support exceeding $8.841.00, a military
credit union debt approximating $4,112.00, and taxes owed the IRS in the amount of
$1,600.00).
Applicant claims major progress in paying off his listed debts.  He claims to have
reduced the listed balance with creditor 1.a (a deficiency balance owed on returned
utility equipment in the 1999-2000 time frame) to $437.00 in October 2007, and no
longer receives any bills from this creditor (R.T., at 38-39).  However, Applicant provides
no documentation of promised account information detailing his payments to creditor
1.a and current status of the account.
Applicant claims he has been making regular payments on his creditor 1.b
account (see ex. 6) and to have made considerable progress in clearing this debt (R.T.,
at 40-41).  He has made recent payments on the account and committed to furnishing
bank statements that reflect his debt payments on this account (R.T., at 40).  The post
billing transaction ledger (ex. B) that reportedly covers this debt lists account numbers
that do not appear to match the account number in Applicant’s credit report (ex. 5) for
this creditor.  Further, the prior billings transaction document does not reflect the
balance still owing on this account.  Without more clarification, little payment credit can
be accorded Applicant.
Addressing the status of creditor 1.c, Applicant admits only to being a card holder
on a credit card account opened by his first wife (W1) before their divorce in December
1999 (see exs. 1 and 3; R.T., at 41-42).  He claims he never used the card and never
assumed responsibility for its payment (R.T., at 42).  Applicant disputes this debt but
provides no documentation of any correspondence with either the creditor or the credit
reporting agency.  
Applicant admits to incurring delinquent debts with creditors 1.d through 1.h.
Creditor 1.d represents a student loan that he claims to have partially paid down under
a payment plan he arranged with the creditor (see ex. 3; R.T., at 42).  Under his
payment plan with the creditor, he made monthly payments of $107.00 for about five
months, before he quit making payments altogether in December 2007 (see ex. 6).
Currently, he does not know what balance remains on this debt (R.T., at 42). 
With respect to creditor 1.e, Applicant co-signed for a 1998 car purchased by his
step-son from his marriage to W1. He recollects his step-son’s paying around
$11,000.00 for the vehicle (R.T., at 43, 59).  When the step-son stopped making
payments on the car in 2000, the seller called Applicant to ascertain Applicant’s taking
over his step-son’s payments (R.T., at 60).  Applicant declined the seller’s request at the
time and only learned of the vehicle’s repossession (sometime in 2000) when he got his
4
own credit report in 2007, and checked the status of the vehicle.  Applicant has just
obtained his step-son’s telephone number and will attempt to reach him to ascertain his
payment intentions. 
Applicant claims to have paid off his back child support (creditor 1.f), which was
significant according to his December 2006 credit report (i.e., $8,841.00 as of
September 2006).  One of his credit reports (ex. 6) reports a zero balance, and
Applicant corroborated his pay-down of his listed back child support with his post-
hearing submission.  An admitted financial activity report reflects a significant pay-down,
and only $57.85 owing as of February 2008 (see ex. A).  Based on Applicant’s payment
assurances (R.T., at 27-28 and his documented support, Applicant’s payment claims
covering creditor 1.f are accepted.  
By contrast, Applicant has not been able to make any tangible progress in
resolving the last two listed debts in the SOR.  He assures he will look into the status of
creditor 1.g’s debt (a military allotment he initially established in 1992) and 1.h’s debt
(his IRS debt), and pay any remaining amounts owing on these two debts (see ex. 6;
R.T., at 44-45).  To date, though, he has not provided any documented repayment plans
or initiatives.  Nor he has sought or obtained financial counseling.
Applicant nets $2,000.00 in monthly income (R.T., at 48-49).  He currently has a
monthly remainder after expense deductions of around $173.00 (R.T., at 54). 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision-making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines
require the judge to consider all of the “Conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the “Mitigating
Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be
granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these
factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing
extenuation and mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2
of the Directive, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial,
common-sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An
5
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income
is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”  See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common-sense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversarial proceedings, the Judge may
draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the
evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are
grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing on the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take into account cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation
or mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is an electronics technician for a defense contractor who accumulated
a number of delinquent debts (consumer, student loan, child support, and tax liability)
following his separation from the U.S. Army in 2000.  Most of his listed delinquent
accounts and continue remain unresolved.  Absent documented discharge or payment
initiatives with the listed creditors, these debts raise security significant concerns.  
 In Applicant’s case, his still outstanding delinquent debts and his failure to
document the debts he disputes or has paid warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for financial considerations: DC 19 (a)
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and DC 19 (c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.” These disqualifying conditions cover the core concern of AG ¶
18: poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
6
regulations, which, both individually and collectively, can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
Applicant’s accumulated dents are attributable in part to immaturity and living
beyond his means during his two marriages.  His situation presented does not
demonstrate extenuating circumstances sufficient to warrant application of MC 20 (b),
“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” of AG ¶ 18.
With the exception of his satisfied back child-support obligations, none of
Applicant’s covered debts are documented to have been paid.  Several of them,
however, are quite old.  Of this group of debts, two appear to be covered by his state’s
statute of limitations: specifically, creditors 1.c and 1.e.  The state statute of limitations
in Applicant’s state for claims based on a written contract is four years See
16.004(a)(3) of T Civ. Prac. and Rem. Code, §§ 16.051 (statute of limitations for
contracts and claims not otherwise provided for) and 16.004(a)(3) (statute of limitations
for debts).  Applicant’s listed debts with creditors 1.c and 1.e all appear to covered by
the State’s statute of limitations, and are treated, as such, herein as debts that are
limitations barred.  
While potentially applicable statutes of limitation have not been recognized by
our Appeal Board to absorb security risks associated with unresolved delinquent debts.
Statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation.  They have never
been equated with good-faith efforts, though, to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020,
at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001). 
Weight, if any, to be assigned to potentially applicable statutes of limitations
under the new Guidelines should be considered in light of all the circumstances
surrounding the existing debts, and must take account of the Applicant’s entire history
of demonstrated trust and responsibility. Viewed in this whole person light, the
controlling state statute of limitations for written contracts and debts are entitled to be
accorded significant mitigation weight in evaluating Applicant’s overall financial risk with
respect to these specifically covered debts. 
                                                        
Based on Applicant’s afforded reliance on his State’s four-year statute of
limitation to avert enforcement risk with respect to his accorded limitation-barred debts,
mitigation credit is available to Applicant  By virtue of the age and non-enforcement
status of the debts (only creditors 1.c and 1.e), MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” has applicability to these specific limitation-barred debts.  
7
With respect to Applicant’s remaining unresolved debts, mitigation credit is only
partially available based on his proofs.  Without any documentation of his payment
efforts and disputes concerning most of these debts (i.e., creditors 1.a and 1.b, creditor
1.d, and creditors 1.g and 1.h), important corroboration is lacking.  And while the
Appeal Board has never held the lack of corroboration to be dispositive when
assessing debt disputes (see ISCR Case No. 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 2006)), it has
certainly considered it an important factor in evaluating the intrinsic reliability or weight
of evidence.  See ISCR Case No. 01 -02677 (App. Bd. October 2002).  Not helpful
either to Applicant’s mitigation efforts is his lack of any demonstrable steps to seek
financial counseling. 
Without more documented information to demonstrate he is addressing his
listed debts and making use of financial counseling, he cannot safely mitigate all of the
Government’s financial concerns.  Only Applicant’s back child support obligations are
adequately documented and entitled to mitigation treatment.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases (as here).
Use of a whole person assessment that takes into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt accumulations is insufficient to enable
Applicant to surmount security concerns independent of the express disqualifying
conditions covered by AG¶ 18.  Without more to demonstrate progress in resolving his
remaining debts, it is difficult to draw convincing conclusions about his overall
trustworthiness based on factors not covered in the mitigation conditions of the
guideline for financial considerations.   
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
unsatisfied debts and overall presentation of payment histories, Applicant does not
mitigate security concerns related to his still outstanding debts.  Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a,
1.b, 1.d, 1.g, and 1.h of the SOR.  By contrast, favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to sub-paragraphs 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
8
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT    
Sub-para. 1.a:      AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b:      AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c:      FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d:      AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e:      FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f:      FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g:      AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.h      AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                        
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
9
