  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 07-05886
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 28, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline J for criminal conduct, Guideline G for alcohol
consumption, and Guideline E for personal conduct (falsification of a security-clearance
application). For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided against Applicant.
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on November 28, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 26, 2007. The hearing took place as
scheduled on March 11, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 19, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the SOR alleges six incidents of criminal conduct, five of
which are alcohol-related incidents—driving under the influence (DUI). Under Guideline
G, the SOR cross-references to the five alcohol-related incidents under Guideline J.
And under Guideline E, the SOR alleges Applicant falsified material facts on a security-
clearance application because he disclosed only one of his five alcohol-related
incidents. In his reply to the SOR, Applicant admits the Guideline J allegations, but he
denies the allegations under Guidelines G and E. Based on the record evidence as a
whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In May 2000, he
was awarded a bachelor of science in electrical engineering technology. He has worked
in the defense industry since June 2000. His current position is known as a system and
network engineer. His day-to-day work involves supporting a ground-based missile-
defense program. His annual salary is about $69,000. He is seeking to retain a security
clearance. He believes he was initially granted a security clearance via his military
service in a state national guard unit where he worked with the same missile-defense
program. He served in the guard for six years until his honorable discharge in 2000. 
Applicant has never married, but he describes a woman as his common-law wife
with whom he has two children, ages four and six. She is employed outside the home
as a counselor working with children. 
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct, which consists primarily of alcohol-
related offenses (Exhibits 2 and 3). He described the incidents in a January 2007
interview (Exhibit 2), and the incidents are summarized as follows:
• January 1994–arrested and charged with unlawful breaking and entering of a
motor vehicle; case ended in a dismissal or no bill.
• August 1998–arrested, charged, and convicted of DUI.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
3
• January 1999–arrested, charged, and convicted of DUI.
• June 1999–arrested and charged with DUI; disposition uncertain. 
• March 2002–arrested, charged, and convicted of prowling and DUI.
• May 2003–arrested and charged with DUI; convicted in 2007. 
The most recent DUI incident is discussed below.
Applicant was arrested for DUI in May 2003 when he was found sleeping in his
auto on the side of the road. He had been drinking at his cousin’s house in his
hometown, which is more than 100 miles from the community where he lives and works.
After leaving his cousin’s house, he decided not to drive, and so he pulled over and
went to sleep in the vehicle. The police arrived at some point and arrested him for DUI.
He was held in jail overnight and released the next day. 
Applicant says he lost track of the incident for various reasons, such as the
geographic distance, moving and changing addresses, etc. (Tr. 52–53). He became
aware of an outstanding arrest warrant during the January 2007 interview; the arrest
warrant was issued in July 2003 (Exhibit 2). He then took action to have the case
resolved and it concluded in September or October 2007 when he was convicted of
DUI. He was fined $815 and placed on two years of probation, which expires in about
October 2009. The probation is supervised and requires him to report to a probation
officer periodically. In addition to the conviction and probation, the state revoked his
driver’s license for three years. He believes it is revoked until sometime in 2011.  
Applicant completed a security-clearance application in November 2005 (Exhibit
1). Concerning his police record, Question 23d asked him to answer the following
question: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted or any offense(s) related to
alcohol or drugs?” He responded affirmatively and disclosed the March 2002 DUI
incident. He did not disclose any of the other DUI charges and convictions.   
He has abstained from alcohol since sometime after his arrest for the 2003 DUI.
Doing so suits his lifestyle and his health concerns. In 2002, Applicant had successful
surgery for brain cancer. As a result, he takes medicine to control seizures and he has
been told by his doctors that he should not drink alcohol. In connection with this
proceeding, Applicant sought out and participated in a substance-abuse program
(Exhibit A). He successfully completed the program in January 2008. Applicant has not
received a diagnosis of alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse.  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes5
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 15
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”16
 DC 3 is the “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally17
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
 DC 4 is the “individual is currently on parole or probation.”18
5
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity14
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.”  15
In general, a security concern is raised by Applicant’s pattern of criminal conduct.
In particular, DC 1,  DC 3,  and DC 4  apply against Applicant as evidenced by his16 17 18
multiple arrests, charges, and convictions for DUI, as well as his status as a probationer
until October 2009. In addition, the gap in time from the May 2003 DUI arrest to the
conviction more than four years later in 2007 is of some concern. This circumstance
suggests a degree of irresponsibility on Applicant’s part. The breaking-and-entering
charge in SOR ¶ 1.f, however, is not much of a concern because the charge was
dismissed and it appears Applicant may have been at the wrong place at the wrong
time. To sum up, the totality of the criminal conduct calls into question Applicant’s
judgment as well as his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline also contains several conditions that could mitigate security
concerns, but none apply in Applicant’s favor. It is true that his last arrest was nearly
five years ago and he quit drinking alcohol the same year. But the 2003 DUI offense
was not resolved until 2007, and Applicant is now a probationer until about October
2009. This means he is now serving a lawful sentence imposed by a state court. This is
a key fact. And it explains why the criminal conduct guideline is being decided against
Applicant while the alcohol consumption guideline is being decided for Applicant. His
probationary status militates against a successful case in reform and rehabilitation. In
other words, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will serve probation without violation and
then go on to be a law-abiding citizen. Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against
Applicant. 
 Revised Guidelines at 15–16 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating19
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 15. 20
 DC 1 is “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child21
or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
 Revised Guidelines at 15.22
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating23
conditions).  
6
Under Guideline G for alcohol consumption,  the security concern is that19
“excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”  20
The guideline contains several conditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying. In general, a security concern is raised by Applicant’s pattern of
drinking-and-driving. The most pertinent DC concerns alcohol-related incidents away
from work,  which applies against Applicant due to the multiple arrests, charges, and21
convictions for DUI. Taken together, these facts and circumstances raise questions
about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
The guideline also contains four conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
The most pertinent is MC 1, which provides as follows:
So much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment.22
MC 1 applies in Applicant’s favor because nearly five years have passed since the last
alcohol-related incident. He has abstained from alcohol since sometime in 2003, and he
is now a family man with a partner to whom he is committed and he is raising two
children with her. Likewise, alcohol consumption is inconsistent with his medical
condition and the prescribed medicines he takes for his condition. His excessive
consumption of alcohol is in the past, and it no longer casts doubt on his current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment because he has established a pattern of
abstinence. Accordingly, Guideline G is decided for Applicant. 
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and23
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
 Revised Guidelines at 10.24
 DC 1 is the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security25
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness,
or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
7
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  24
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the
information did not need to be reported. 
At issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s answer to Question 23d in his
November 2005 security-clearance application. It is undisputed that Applicant was
required to report all DUI charges and convictions in response to this question. He did
not, reporting only the 2002 DUI incident. He contends that he answered the question in
this way because: (1) he was told he only had to list felonies; and (2) he may have
misread the question (Tr. 39–43, 68–71). His testimony is not credible. Given his
military experience and his experience as an employee in the defense industry, he had
to know his lengthy record of drunk driving might be a problem for his security
clearance. He simply understated his record hoping he would pass. Moreover, his
varying explanations undermine his credibility. The record evidence is sufficient to
conclude that Applicant deliberately omitted or falsified material facts when he
answered Question 23d by understating his history of alcohol-related offenses.  In25
other words, his answer to Question 23d was at best a half-truth—it was not a full, frank,
and truthful answer. 
All of the MC under Guideline E have been reviewed and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. Making false statements to the federal government during the
security-clearance process is serious misconduct, and it is not easily explained away,
extenuated, or mitigated. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
falsification of the security-clearance application was given great weight, and the case
would have been decided against Applicant on this basis alone. Likewise, the whole-
person concept (including his honorable military service, the absence of workplace
misconduct, and his alcohol-related rehabilitation efforts) was given due consideration
8
and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
