1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )         ISCR Case No. 07-04539
SSN: ------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Michelle L. Perry, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on April 23, 2007.
On October 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under foreign influence
(Guideline B) and foreign preference (Guideline C). The action was taken pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on December 6, 2007. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on February 26, 2008, and the hearing was held on March 25, 2008.
The transcript was received on April 2, 2008.
At the hearing, the government submitted four exhibits (GE). The fourth exhibit
(administrative notice exhibit) contains facts from United States Government agency
2
publications that describe the government of Nigeria, its human rights record, and
various problems U.S. citizens face in traveling to the country. At the hearing, testimony
was taken from the Vice President (VP) of Applicant’s employer and Applicant. He also
submitted two exhibits (AE). The first exhibit (AE A) represents Applicant’s request to
take administrative notice of the factual representations set fourth at nine locations of
the government’s administrative source material. (GE 4) 
Findings of Fact
Foreign Influence
The SOR alleges in paragraph 1 that Applicant’s ties and travel to Nigeria raise
foreign influence concerns under Guideline B. Paragraph 2 alleges that Applicant’s valid
Nigerian passport, his use of that passport in February 2007, and his equal loyalty to the
U.S. and Nigeria indicates a foreign preference that may influence him to make
decisions harmful to the U.S. He admitted all allegations under paragraph 1 except for
subparagraph 1.e. He denied SOR 1.e. because his mother-in-law and father-in-law are
also citizens of the U.S., and have lived in the U.S. for the past 23 years. Applicant also
admitted subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b., but denied 2.c., claiming he could not recall
telling the investigator his loyalties were equally split between the two countries.
Applicant is 36 years old. He was born in Nigeria and came to the U.S. in 1993
for educational reasons. According to his security clearance application (SCA, GE 1), he
attended a university from January 1994 to December 1995. He transferred to a
technical institute in August 1997, where he was enrolled until December 1998. He
entered another university in this region in August 2002, and was awarded a Master’s of
Business degree in May 2005. 
GE 1 shows that between May 1996 and January 1998, Applicant was employed
as an applications engineer with a private company; Applicant was apparently promoted
to a software engineer position (at the same company) in January 1998, and worked in
that position until January 2000. From January 2000 to December 2005, he was
employed by a leading software company as a senior software engineer. Since
December 2005, Applicant has been employed in same position with his current
employer. 
Applicant’s mother, 77 years old, is a resident citizen of Nigeria. (SOR 1.a.) Since
1977, she has been living in the southwestern part of Nigeria that is politically calm and
stable; the area is not part of the Niger Delta region. (Tr. 34-36; GE 4). She still
oversees a private kindergarten school she owns, although she has relinquished the
day-to-day operations to the principal. Her continuing association with the school keeps
her mind challenged. Applicant’s mother has never worked for the Nigerian government.
Even though she owns the school, Applicant does not expect to inherit the property. 
Applicant’s father passed away in February 2007 at the age of 73 (GE 1), after a
lengthy illness. The record does not disclose his father’s employment, but he was
 According to Applicant’s SCA (GE 1), they married in July 1998. 1
3
retired when Applicant provided an interview to a federal investigator in September
2006. (GE 3)
Applicant contacts his mother by telephone about twice a month. He has been
sending her about $300.00 every three months since 1996. The money symbolizes
Applicant’s respect for her efforts in properly raising him during his formative years. (Tr.
59)
Applicant’s 40-year-old brother (SOR 1.b.) is a resident citizen of Nigeria. He
lives in the same city as Applicant’s mother. He is employed as an architect and owns
his own firm. Although Applicant’s brother is licensed by the Nigerian government, he
has never worked on any government projects. (Tr. 41) Applicant contacts him about
once every two or three months.  
Applicant’s sister is a resident citizen of Nigeria. (SOR 1.b.) She is 42 years old,
and lives in the same region as Applicant’s mother. She teaches pharmacy at a local
university that receives public and private funds. Applicant is uncertain whether his
sister’s position makes her an employee of the Nigerian government. (Tr. 42) Applicant
maintains contact with his sister at a frequency of about once every three months. 
Applicant’s has three remaining brothers who reside in the U.S. One is 34 years
old, a permanent resident (SOR 1.c.), who has been living in the U.S. since 1998. The
other two brothers were born in the United Kingdom and are naturalized U.S. citizens.
One is 56 years old and received his U.S. citizenship in September 2004. He has been
living in the U.S. since 1988. (Tr. 43) The last brother is 46 years old, and has lived in
the U.S. since 1995. He received his U.S. citizenship in 2004. (Tr. 43; GE 1) Applicant’s
three brothers living in the U.S. are married with children. None of Applicant’s brothers
have ever worked for the Nigerian government. (Tr. 45) Applicant last saw his three
brothers at their father’s funeral in February 2007. (Tr. 52-54)
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law were born in Nigeria (SOR 1.e.), but
became naturalized citizens of the U.S. They have lived and worked in the U.S. since
1983. (Tr. 45; AE B )
Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Nigeria (SOR 1.f.), and resides in
the U.S. with Applicant. He testified that they were married in September 1999,  and1
have three children, six, four, and three months. The three children were born in the
U.S.
Applicant has traveled to Nigeria (SOR 1.g.) in 2001, 2003, 2006, and 2007. In
2001, he spent two weeks visiting his family in Nigeria. In 2003, he spent two weeks in
Nigeria visiting his mother and father for their birthdays. In 2006, he returned to Nigeria
to comfort his sick father. Applicant’s last trip to the country was to bury his father in
2007. (Tr. 49) He used his Nigerian passport on all trips.
4
The only financial interest Applicant and his wife have in Nigeria is approximately
$25,000.00 in stock. They have no other financial interest in the country. Applicant has
lived in the same house in the U.S. since March 2001. (GE 1) He believes the house is
worth about $750,000.00. 
Applicant indicated he would report any efforts to pressure him to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) because U.S. security and his family’s security are
paramount. Applicant’s loyalty is only to the U.S., and that is why he emigrated to the
U.S. in 1993. 
Applicant has not voted in a foreign election since becoming a U.S. citizen in
2003 (Tr. 32), but has voted in three U.S. national or regional elections. In his position
as the sound supervisor at his church since 1999, Applicant has directed a team in
video taping the church sermons and music. (Tr. 57)
Foreign Preference
Until early March 2008, Applicant had a Nigerian passport scheduled to expire in
2011. (SOR 2.a.) He used his Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria in 2007. (SOR 2.b.)
Applicant denied (in his answer to the SOR) telling the Office of Personnel Management
investigator that he had divided loyalties to the U.S. and Nigeria. (SOR 2.c.) Applicant is
mistaken as the second interview he had with the investigator in September 2006 (GE
3), Applicant referred to his split loyalties. However, in his one-page attachment of
corrections to his interviews in 2006, dated August 2, 2007 (GE 3), Applicant stated:
Regarding my loyalty to the United States: My loyalty lies with the United
States. The only reason why my wife and I kept our Nigerian passports is
for the ease of travel back and forth from US to Nigeria. However, our
unquestioned loyalty lies with the US. In my security processing with NSA,
I have submitted a Foreign Citizenship Renunciation Certification. I have
included a copy of this certificate. (GE 3)
Because Applicant did not know his use of his Nigerian passport was a potential
security problem (Tr. 28), he continued to use it after becoming a U.S. citizen in July
2003, and after receiving a U.S. passport in August 2003. Since receiving the SOR in
October 2007, Applicant has not used his Nigerian passport, and has no intention of
renewing it. (Tr. 31)
In an attachment to GE 3, there is a form (Form G6411) entitled “FOREIGN
CITIZENSHIP RENUNCIATION CERTIFICATION,” signed by Applicant and a security
officer on June 28, 2007. Just underneath the title of the form is a space for
identification of the “COUNTRY FORMERLY A CITIZEN OF.” That space is blank. The
purpose of the form is to verify the loyalty of an applicant who seeks sensitive
compartmented information (SCI). The form includes instructions to return a foreign
passport and forego any other privileges of foreign citizenship.
5
At the hearing, Applicant referred to the renunciation form he signed in June
2007 in explaining the measures he had taken to renounce his citizenship. (Tr. 23) In
addition to signing the form, he surrendered his passport to the security officer for
destruction in early March 2008. (Tr. 51) The VP of Applicant’s employer displayed an
envelope containing the shredded passport. (Tr. 71) The VP testified that Applicant’s
wife transferred her Nigerian passport to the FSO for destruction on March 25, 2008.
(Id.)
When asked about the delay between signing the form in June 2007 and
destroying his Nigerian passport, Applicant testified, “Well, I - - I - - I didn’t see any
urgency in doing it. I just kind of left it behind, you know. Not that I needed it. I didn’t
need it any way.” (Tr. 51, 52) When asked again to explain his answer he had just
provided concerning his delay in destroying his passport, Applicant stated, “I said I
didn’t see any urgency in destroying the passport. I - - I thought it was, you know, that
this was given up for the time being and I - - just kept the passport.”(Id.)
Applicant has not voted in a Nigerian election since becoming a U.S. citizen. (Tr.
31, 32) He has voted in U.S. elections in 2004, November 2006, and January 2008.
Since 1999, he has directed a video reproduction team for his church. (Tr 57, 58)
Character Evidence
The VP has been working for Applicant’s employer since 2002, and recalls that
Applicant was hired in December 2005. The VP is not familiar with Applicant’s job
performance because he does not work on classified projects. The VP believes
Applicant is security conscious and has no security violations. He recommends him for
a position of trust. Finally, the VP is aware Applicant destroyed his passport (Tr. 70),
and is aware his wife’s Nigerian passport was turned over for destruction on the day of
the hearing. 
Administrative Notice
I have taken administrative notice GE 4 that consists of the following government
documents:
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of African Affairs, Background Note: Nigeria,
dated October 2007;
U.S. Department of State, Consular Information Sheet, Nigeria, dated April 16,
2007;
U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Nigeria, dated October 30, 2007
U.S. Department of State, Nigeria: Country Reports of Human Rights Practices-
2006, dated March 6, 2007; and,
6
Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for Congress, Nigeria: Current
Issues, dated April 12, 2007 (Congressional Research Service Report) at 1; 
Nigeria, since gaining its independence in 1960, has been controlled more by
military rulers than democratically elected civilian rulers. Even though the government
returned to civilian rule in 1999, the government continues to have a poor human rights
record. The lack of law and order in various areas of the country results in internal,
periodic armed conflicts between religious, political and ethnic factions, and external
conflicts with travelers to the country, particularly in the Niger Delta region. Recognizing
the troubling problems in the Niger Delta region, the current president, elected in May
2007, has pledged to restore peace and security to the region, while instilling long-term,
electoral reform throughout the country. President Bush considers Nigeria an important
partner in the war on terror. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
7
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Foreign Influence (FI)
The security issues connected to foreign influence are familial ties, contacts,
and/or proprietary/financial interests that could be used to generate a heightened risk of
forcing an applicant into  a position of having to choose between the foreign entity and
the U.S. 
Foreign Preference (FP)
When an individual acts in a way that indicates a preference for a foreign country
over the U.S., then he or she may be disposed to provide information or make decisions
harmful to the U.S. 
Analysis
Foreign Influence
Foreign contacts and interests result in security concerns where those contacts
and interests create divided loyalties, or may be manipulated or induced by a foreign
entity that is harmful to U.S., or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
entity. Decisions under this guideline should include the foreign country where the
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to whether the foreign
government targets U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated
with the risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of family ties in foreign country is not automatically
disqualifying under the foreign influence guideline. When assessing the family ties, it is
important to weigh the totality of these ties in a foreign country, rather than trying to
weigh them in isolation. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2003)
Considering the record as a whole, the government has established its case under the
FI guideline. FI disqualifying condition (DC) 7.a. (contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) applies. Applicant’s family ties to his
relatives, who are resident citizens of Nigeria, require him to present evidence in
mitigation to meet his burden of persuasion that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him.
8
Applicant’s mother, sister and brother are resident citizens of Nigeria. While they
require licenses from the Nigerian government, they have never been
agents/employees of the government. Applicant’s second brother is a citizen of Nigeria,
and a permanent resident alien of the U.S. Applicant’s two other brothers are citizens of
the United Kingdom and the U.S. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are
citizens and residents of Nigeria and the U.S. Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Nigeria and
the U.S., and lives with Applicant. Applicant has traveled to Nigeria in 2001, 2003, 2006,
and 2007. His contact with his mother (about twice a month) and his sister and brother
(about once every two or three months) create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation
or manipulation within the scope of FI DC 7.a. 
I have concluded that FI DC 7.e. (a substantial business, financial , or property
interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business,
which could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation) does not apply. Given the approximate value (approximately $750,00.00)
of Applicant’s home in the U.S., the $25,000.00 Applicant has in Nigerian stock is not
“substantial” financial interest that could expose Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign
influence. 
Three of the six mitigating conditions (MC) under the FI guideline may apply to
the facts and circumstances of this case: 
FC MC 8.a. (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the position or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.); 
FI MC 8.b. (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is minimal, or the individual has such deep and long lasting
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest);
 FI MC 8.c. (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation).
Applicant’s mother, brother, and sister have never been employed or agents of
the Nigerian Government. While there are law and order problems in Nigeria, they are
not in the politically stable area where Applicant’s mother, brother and sister reside.
Given the good relations this country has with the U.S., it is highly unlikely the Nigerian
 I recognize relations between friendly nations can change, and not all cases of espionage against the U.S.2
are committed by countries hostile to U.S. interests. ISCR Case No. 00-0317 (App. Bd. Mar.29, 2002)
9
government would attempt to target the family members of a U.S. citizen.  FI MC 8.a.2
applies. 
FC MC 8.b. also applies in Applicant’s favor based on his loyalty to the U.S.
Though a person’s statements of how he would act or react to a potential future event
cannot be given much weight, Applicant’s statements regarding coercion from foreign
sources are entitled to some favorable consideration. ISCR Case No. 02-26826
(November 12, 2003). Applicant has stated he would resist and report any attempt at
pressure to the appropriate authorities because of his concern for the security of the
U.S., as well as his family. 
There are a number of other reasons why I believe Applicant will not yield to
foreign efforts to influence or exploit him through his family members. He has lived
continuously in the U.S. since he turned 21 years old in 1993. He owns his home and
has lived there since 2001. While he and wife still own about $25,000.00 worth of stock
in Nigeria, the stock cannot be considered “substantial,” and pales in comparison to the
value of his U.S. home. He married his wife (a naturalized U.S. citizen) in 1999. His
children, ages 6, 4, and three months, were born in the U.S. After receiving continuing
education at a university and a technical institute in the late 1990s, he received his
Masters of Business degree in May 2005. Applicant has continuously worked for
American employers since 1996. He and his wife have been U.S. citizens since 2003.
Applicant has participated in American democracy by voting. He has been active in his
church since 1999. Two of Applicant’s three remaining brothers are naturalized U.S.
citizens that have lived in the U.S. for at least nine years. Applicant’s last brother is not
a citizen of the U.S., but is a permanent resident, and has lived in the U.S. since 1998.
Finally, his VP at his employer recommends him for a position of trust. Considering his
education accomplishments, his U.S. employment, and his family ties in this country, I
expect Applicant to resolve any potential conflict in favor of the U.S. His travel to Nigeria
in 2001, 2003, 2006, and 2007 to visit or bury a member of his family are the
reasonable actions of immigrants with relatives in a foreign country. 
Foreign Preference (FP)
When a person demonstrates by his actions that he prefers a foreign country
over the U.S., then he may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are
harmful the U.S. The record reflects before Applicant’s FSO destroyed the passport in
early March 2008, he had a Nigerian passport that was valid until to 2011. He used his
Nigerian passport in February 2007 to participate in the burial of his father. FP DC
10.a.(1) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member -
possession of a current passport) applies. Applicant’s possession of a valid passport
until March 2008 after he used the passport in February 2007 constitutes proscribed
conduct under FP DC 10.a.(1) While a person may describe himself as a dual citizen
10
based on his feelings for the country where he was born, Applicant’s use of his Nigerian
passport before and after his September 2006 statement of divided loyalties is clearly
evidence of his actions of foreign preference that occurred after he became a U.S.
citizen. Possession and/or use of the foreign passport after being naturalized as a U.S.
citizen constitutes the exercise of a privilege of his Nigerian citizenship that he was not
entitled to. 
Though Applicant filled out a renouncement declaration in June 2007 (one-page
attachment to GE 3), purportedly evidencing his willingness to renounce his Nigerian
citizenship, very little weight can be assigned to the document as probative evidence of
Applicant’s intent to renounce his Nigerian citizenship at the time. There is no evidence
the document was supplied to Nigeria or a U.S. agency, although Applicant believed his
company was about to enter a contract with a U.S. security agency. Furthermore, the
declaration (within the document) also directs the signer to destroy his passport, yet,
Applicant waffled a bit when asked why he waited until March 2008 to destroy his
passport. The delay strongly suggests Applicant had not resolved his intentions about
renouncing his citizenship in June 2007. 
A careful reading of his August 2007, attached corrections to his September
2006 interview (GE 3), and his testimony regarding his willingness to renounce his
Nigerian citizenship weigh in his favor under FP MC 11.b. (the individual has expressed
a willingness to renounce dual citizenship), but are inadequate to satisfy his burden of
persuasion under the FP guideline. Applicant’s destruction of his Nigerian passport in
March 2008 invokes the application of FP MC 11.e. (the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered o the cognizant authority, or otherwise invalidated) Considering all the
evidence under FP MC 11.b. and 11.e, I conclude Applicant has met his burden of
persuasion under the FP guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
My finding for Applicant under the FI and FP guidelines must still be evaluated in
the context of nine variables known as the whole person concept. In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should consider the
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. Applicant’s regular contact with his three
resident, citizen family members in Nigeria is overcome by his strong ties to the U.S.
that began when he emigrated from Nigeria to the U.S. almost 15 years ago. Having
viewed the evidence in its entirety, I am confident he will resist and report any effort at
coercion from a foreign nation while continuing to demonstrate that his preference for
U.S. interests is paramount.
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Foreign Influence, Guideline B): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Foreign Preference, Guideline C): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
