 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-08268 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on February 4, 
2005.  On October 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 2, 2007; answered it 
on November 16, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on November 19, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on December 7, 2007, and the case was assigned to me on December 12, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 6, 2008, setting the case for 
February 27, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
 
2 
 
 
and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
presented the testimony of five witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through EE, which were admitted without objection. AX FF and GG were offered and 
then withdrawn. 
 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until March 7, 2008 to 
enable Applicant to submit additional evidence.  Applicant timely submitted AX HH, to 
which Department Counsel objected (HX IV). My ruling on Department Counsel’s 
objection is set out below. The record closed on March 7, 2008. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 11, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant’s counsel both requested that I take 
administrative notice of relevant facts about the Republic of India. Department 
Counsel’s request is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I, and Applicant’s 
request is HX II.  The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of 
fact. 
 
I took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel, except for the 
facts based on Enclosures 5 and 6 to HX I. I determined that Enclosure 5, the Annual 
Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage for the 
year 2000, was too old and its basis for its conclusions were too limited to be a reliable 
source of current information.  See ISCR Case No. 03-21434 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2007). I determined that Enclosure 6, the Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage for the year 2005 is based on the same 
methodology as Enclosure 5, and is too limited to be the basis for administrative notice 
about India, since the only reference to India in the report is one incident in 2004 where 
a U.S. software manufacturer reported that a source code and confidential design 
documents were stolen from a research and development center in India. I offered 
Department Counsel the opportunity to offer these three documents as government 
exhibits, akin to learned treatises under Fed. R. Evid. 803(18), to be given whatever 
weight I determined appropriate in my decision, and he accepted that offer. The 
enclosures to HX I were marked as GX 3 and 4 and admitted without objection.  
 
I also took administrative notice as requested by Applicant’s counsel, except for 
the matters on page 16 of HX II, which are based on a report from Human Rights 
Watch, an advocacy group, and the matters on pages 17-22, which are argument rather 
than a recitation of facts (Tr. 68-69).  
 
 
3 
 
 
Memorandum of Law 
 
 Applicant’s counsel submitted a memorandum of law for my consideration, 
attached to the record as HX III. 
 
Evidence of Detention and Interrogation of Suspected Terrorists 
 
Applicant submitted evidence that the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has 
detained suspected terrorists in secret locations and used harsh interrogation methods 
(AX HH).  Department Counsel objected on the ground that the evidence was irrelevant 
(HX IV). After examining the proffered evidence and considering Department Counsel’s 
objection, I have determined that the evidence is irrelevant to the question whether 
Applicant’s family, financial, and military connections to India raise security concerns 
that have not been mitigated. Accordingly, AX HH is attached to the record but not 
admitted. 
 
Correction of Transcript 
 
 Applicant’s counsel submitted a list of corrections to the transcript.  Department 
Counsel objected to the corrections changing the date of Applicant’s entry into the U.S. 
from 1993 to 1992 and correcting the spelling of Applicant’s sister’s name. For the 
purposes of this decision, I have accepted 1992 as the date of Applicant’s entry into the 
U.S., because he provided that date on his SF 86 (GX 1 at 5, question 12). The 
corrected spelling of his sister’s name is consistent with AX B and has no decisional 
importance. The list of proposed corrections and an annotated copy of the transcript are 
attached to the record as HX V. Department Counsel’s comments regarding the 
corrections are attached as HX VI. 
 
Amendment of the SOR 
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR 
by adding two allegations based on evidence adduced during the hearing.  First, he 
moved to amend the SOR by adding an allegation that Applicant owns two 
condominiums in India worth a total of $20,000. This information was provided by 
Applicant on his SF 86 (GX 1 at 5) and repeated at the hearing. Second, he moved to 
amend the SOR by adding an allegation that Applicant has a brother-in-law and sister-
in-law who are citizens and residents of India. Applicant objected to both amendments.  
I denied the motion (Tr. 200). However, I have considered the significance of Applicant’s 
brother-in-law and sister-in-law in determining whether the disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 7(d) is raised. I have considered all his property interests in India, including the 
condominiums, in my whole-person analysis and in determining whether the security 
concerns based on the property interests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e are mitigated. 
 
 On my own motion, I have amended SOR ¶ 1.d to conform to the evidence by 
changing the beginning date of Applicant’s service in the Indian Navy from 1965 to 
1969. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations, disputing 
only his length of service in the Indian Navy (SOR ¶ 1.d). His admissions in his answer 
to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the 
following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old native of India.  He attended the National Defense 
Academy in India from 1965 to 1969, was commissioned as an officer in the Indian 
Navy, rose to the grade of commander, and retired in 1991. He served several tours at 
sea, serving in the coastal waters of India. He held a security clearance while serving 
aboard ships, but he was not involved in intelligence work (Tr. 172). He was never 
involved in any joint operations with Iran (Tr. 172). He and his wife described their lives 
in the Navy in Spartan terms—low pay, frequent moves, poor housing, and poor food 
(Tr. 106, 144-45). 
 
Applicant receives retirement pay for his Navy service of about $230 per month, 
which is deposited in a bank account in India. The bank account is used solely to 
receive his Navy retired pay (Tr. 155). He has no contact with friends or former 
colleagues in the Indian Navy, because he is a U.S. citizen and the Indian Navy restricts 
its officers from interaction with foreigners (Tr. 183). 
 
Applicant came to the U.S. in 1992, sponsored by his older brother. After coming 
to the U.S., Applicant worked as a life insurance salesman and a software salesman, 
until he founded his own company in 1999 (Tr. 146-47). His company has about 15 
employees and provides information technology consulting. He is the president, chief 
executive officer and sole owner of the company.  Even though he does not hold a 
clearance, his company has several classified contracts (Tr. 133). He estimates the 
value of his business to be $5.7 million (AX A). 
 
Applicant and his wife were married in India in September 1973. Both families 
disapproved of the marriage because Applicant is Hindu and his wife is Parsi. Only his 
mother and one of his six sisters attended his wedding. His mother attended to perform 
Hindu rites (Tr. 140). He became a U.S. citizen in June 2000, and his wife became a 
U.S. citizen in September 2003. They have three adult children who are all naturalized 
U.S. citizens. When asked why he became a U.S. citizen, he responded as follows: 
 
Sir, I love this country. I will tell you why I love this country . . . Americans 
do not know how great is this country because they don’t go out and see 
the sufferings in a third world country. 
 
Which is the country in the world that allow [an immigrant like me] to come 
to 6.7 million dollars of net worth in 16 years? Which country where three 
white girls will decide to marry my nephews? And which country one white 
male will decide to marry my niece? That’s why you were saying that you 
 
5 
 
 
saw some Italian, Polish [guests at my son’s wedding]. They’re my 
daughter-in-laws and our grandchildren. 
 
Which country will worship Jesus Christ and Hindu gods together? My wife 
does it. They said . . . do you denounce India and the liberation of it. I say, 
“I do!” because I am out of that nonsense. That’s why I love this country. 
 
(Tr. 166-67.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife works as the office manager for Applicant’s business (Tr. 104). 
Her father died in 1983 (Tr. 108). Her 85-year-old mother lives in India. Applicant’s wife 
has a brother and sister in India, but she has virtually no contact with them (Tr. 129). 
She last spoke with her mother at her son’s wedding, where her mother performed a 
religious rite, about a year before the hearing. She occasionally calls her mother to 
check on her well-being (Tr. 108).  
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. He traveled to India in 1999 for his father’s 
funeral. He visited his gravely ill mother in July 2000 and returned to India later that year 
for her funeral. He traveled to India in December 2000 for a niece’s wedding and in 
January 2005 for a nephew’s wedding (Tr. 162-64). Even though he is not close to his 
sisters, he attended because they insisted he come and perform a Hindu rite (Tr. 182). 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a U.S. citizen and resident and works in the U.S. as an 
engineer. One sister is a U.S. citizen and resident and works as an insurance 
underwriter.  He has six other sisters who are citizens and residents of India. One is a 
gynecologist; the other five are housewives (AX B). Three of his sisters have children in 
the U.S. who are married to U.S. citizens, and they visit them regularly (Tr. 183-85). 
Two of his sisters have green cards and spend considerable time in the U.S., and one 
of them aspires to become a U.S. citizen (Tr. 142), He has contact with his sisters in 
India by mail or telephone about twice a year. None of his sisters are employed by or 
have any connection with the government of India.  Four of his sister’s spouses are 
retired, one is an ophthalmic surgeon, and one is a civil engineer. None have any 
connection with the government of India except the civil engineer, who sometimes 
works on government contracts. (Tr. 159-61, 169-70). 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Iran residing in India. She is a native of 
India.  At age 15, she married an Iranian and was persuaded by her husband to become 
an Iranian citizen. She is 85 years old and has spent a total of about 30 days of her life 
in Iran. She went to Iran in 1983 to offer prayers for her deceased husband (Tr. 112-14; 
TAB C). She speaks a dialect that Applicant cannot speak or understand, and her 
English is rudimentary. Applicant testified he feels no affection for or obligation to his 
mother-in-law because of the suffering she has inflicted on his wife (Tr. 187). 
 
 Applicant owns his home and a rental property in the U.S. (Tr. 153). He owns two 
small condominiums in India that he bought while he was in the Indian Navy. He 
estimates that together they are worth about $20,000. They are vacant because he has 
 
6 
 
 
been unable to sell them (Tr. 173-76). He does not rent them for fear that squatters will 
occupy them. He regards them as a burden. He testified, “I hope that somebody can 
take it away and get the hell out of this.” (Tr. 174.) 
 
 A retired U.S. Navy admiral who worked for a defense contractor and became a 
mentor for Applicant testified on his behalf.  When they first became acquainted, they 
felt “a very close bond between seamen.”  Based on five years of regular contact, the 
admiral regards Applicant’s character as “absolutely top of the line.”  He strongly 
believes Applicant should have a clearance (Tr. 40-43). 
 
 An employee of a federal contractor who employed Applicant as a subcontractor 
described him as very reliable, responsible, and responsive (Tr. 54-55). The witness, a 
Naval Academy graduate who has held a clearance for many years, knew Applicant’s 
family, attended his son’s wedding, and described him as very family oriented, trying to 
pass on his family values to his children (Tr. 57).  The witness recommended strongly 
Applicant be granted a clearance (Tr. 60). 
 
 Applicant served for two years as vice-president and two years as president of a 
charitable, community, and social organization composed of about 200 families from the 
same region in India. A physician and friend of Applicant who served with him in the 
organization testified he found Applicant to be very responsible, discrete, dependable, 
and trustworthy (Tr. 85-94). 
 
 Applicant’s neighbor for more than four years testified described Applicant as “of 
the highest integrity . . . completely trustworthy, incredibly smart, [and] incredibly 
worldly.”  She regards him as a good neighbor who is very generous, kind, open and 
helpful (Tr. 108-09). 
 
 Government documents presented by Department Counsel reflect concern in the 
U.S. Congress about India’s increasing cooperation with Iran and transfers of 
equipment and technology related to weapons of mass destruction to Iran by Indian 
companies (GX 4). The documents also reflect that in the year 2000 India was as a 
major practitioner of industrial espionage (GX 5). None of the documents suggest, 
however, that India abuses its citizens as a means of collecting economic intelligence. 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the facts below. India’s Constitution 
describes it as a “sovereign, socialist, secular democratic republic.”  It is a multiparty, 
federal, parliamentary democracy. The U.S. and India are the world’s largest 
democracies. The U.S. is India’s largest trading partner and largest investment partner.  
In the past, U.S. policy toward India was dominated by concerns over India’s nuclear 
weapons programs and slow pace of economic reforms.  More recently, the U.S. has 
regarded India as a growing world power with which it shares common strategic 
interests.  Since 2004, bilateral cooperation between the U.S. and India has significantly 
increased in civil nuclear, civil space, and high-technology commerce.  In December 
2006, Congress passed the United States-India Peaceful Atomic Cooperation Act, 
which clears the way for India to buy U.S. nuclear reactors and fuel for civilian use.  In 
 
7 
 
 
July 2007, The U.S. and India completed negotiations for peaceful nuclear cooperation 
that will open the door for U.S. and Indian firms to participate in each other’s civil 
nuclear energy sector. 
 
The primary missions of the Indian Navy are to defend India and its vital sea 
lanes of communication. India is an active member of the United Nations with a long 
tradition of participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations. 
 
The government of India generally respects the rights of its citizens, but it has 
experienced major problems with extrajudicial killings of persons in custody, harsh 
prison conditions, lengthy pretrial detention without trial, disappearances, and torture 
and rape by police and security forces. Physical abuse and excessive force have been 
used to combat terrorism and suppress violent insurgencies operating primarily in the 
northeast part of the country. Human rights violations often go unpunished because of 
lack of accountability and endemic corruption in the government and police forces. A 
number of anti-Western terrorist groups are active in India. There have been terrorist 
attacks in public markets, public transportation, and places of worship, but U.S. citizens 
were not specifically targeted in those attacks. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Iran residing in India (¶ 
1.a); his six sisters are citizens and residents of India (¶ 1.b); he receives a pension 
from the Indian Government for his service in the Indian Navy (¶ 1.c); he served in the 
Indian Navy from 1965 to 1991 (¶ 1.d); he has a bank account in India (¶ 1.e); and he 
traveled to India in January-February 1999, July 2000, November 2000, December 
1000, and January 2005 (¶ 1.f). SOR ¶ 1.d has been amended to allege Navy service 
beginning in 1969 instead of 1965. The security concern under Guideline B is as 
follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United  
 
9 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Under 
the old guidelines in effect before September 1, 2006, a disqualifying condition arose 
merely from the existence of foreign contacts, without any analysis of the level of risk 
posed by those contacts. Under the new guidelines, a disqualifying condition does not 
arise unless a foreign contact creates a “heightened risk.” The term “heightened” is not 
defined in the guidelines, nor has it been addressed by the Appeal Board. I construe the 
term “heightened risk” to mean a risk greater than would exist absent the foreign 
contact. The fact that the risk is “heightened” does not mean it is unacceptable, but a 
“heightened risk” must be explained, extenuated, or mitigated. Applicant has no 
contacts with his former colleagues in the Indian Navy, but his foreign family contacts 
are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, 
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 
7(b). Applicant’s connections to his sisters and in-laws in India are sufficient to raise this 
disqualifying condition. 
 
 A security concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). 
A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation 
to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has no contact with his 
brother-in-law and sister-in-law and no feeling of affection or obligation for his mother-in-
law. To the contrary, he resents the pain his mother-in-law has inflicted on his wife. I 
conclude he has rebutted this presumption of affection or obligation toward his in-laws. 
However, Applicant’s wife still feels an obligation to occasionally check on her mother’s 
welfare, even though she is estranged from her family. Applicant and his wife felt an 
obligation to include his mother-in-law in their son’s wedding ceremony. Although the 
evidence of “heightened risk” is sparse, it is “more than a scintilla.” Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude there is a “heightened risk” that Applicant could be subjected to 
direct or indirect inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Accordingly, I 
conclude AG ¶ 7(d) is raised. 
 
 A security concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or 
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated 
 
10 
 
 
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). Applicant regards his retired pay from the Indian Navy as an 
insignificant pittance, and the sole purpose of the bank account is to receive his retired 
pay. His two condominiums are worth about $20,000, and he has tried to protect them 
from squatters and dispose of them for a reasonable price. He has held onto them for 
20 years, because his frugal nature prevents him to selling them for less than their 
value. Although these properties represent a small part of his net wealth, the totality of 
his financial interests in India are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
condition in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. Applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well 
as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 
00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
 
 None of Applicant’s siblings in India are connected to or dependent on the 
government of India.  None of their spouses have any connection to the government, 
except for one brother-in-law who has construction contracts with the government. His 
 
11 
 
 
siblings in India and their families are not involved in high technology businesses that 
would lend themselves to being practitioners or targets of economic espionage. 
 
 India is a friendly country, a democracy, and a strategic and economic partner.  
While it has experienced human rights abuses, many of those abuses were due to an 
antiquated and inefficient legal system, a government campaign against terrorism and 
violent insurgencies, and an undisciplined and unsupervised law enforcement system.  
Although India has been identified as a practitioner of economic espionage, there is no 
evidence that it uses torture or abuse of its citizens to extract economic information.  
The U.S. and India have had serious disagreements in the past, and India’s 
relationships with Iran have raised some concerns, but the relationship between the 
U.S. and India has evolved into a close economic, technological, and strategic 
partnership. Given its vibrant and close relationship with the U.S., it is unlikely India 
would risk damaging that relationship by abusing its own citizens to coerce a U.S. 
citizen to betray his country.  I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.” Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1. The 
Appeal Board consistently applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that an 
applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to make a choice 
between the interests of the family member and the interests of the U.S. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005).  Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.”   
 
 Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to his in-laws in India is “minimal,” but it 
is not with respect to his sisters and their children. He retains some ties to his sisters, 
and his culture and heritage, but his family ties were seriously weakened by his family’s 
disapproval of his marriage. On the other hand, his loyalties and relationships in the 
U.S. are very strong. Two siblings are U.S. citizens, two sisters in India hold U.S. green 
cards, and one aspires to obtain U.S. citizenship. Applicant is deeply involved in his 
community and his work. He has gained the respect and confidence of retired senior 
military officers. By hard work and determination, he has built a successful company in 
the U.S. He expressed great affection for the U.S. and its values during his testimony at 
the hearing. I am satisfied that, in the unlikely event a conflict of interest should arrive, 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant would resolve the conflict in favor of the U.S. I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is 
established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c).  
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
This mitigating condition is established for Applicant’s in-laws, but not for his sisters 
living in India. 
Finally, where foreign financial or property interests are involved, security 
concerns may be mitigated by showing that “the value or routine nature of the foreign 
business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.” AG ¶ 8(f). Applicant regards his Navy retired pay as an insignificant pittance.  
He uses it for spending money when he travels to India. He receives no income from his 
condominiums and regards them as a burden, but he has not disposed of them. I 
conclude AG ¶ 8(f) is not established because of the potential conflict, but I am satisfied 
Applicant would resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. 
Applicant’s travel to India has no independent security significance, because it 
was solely to visit family members and to attempt to dispose of his property in India. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sep 21, 2005). 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Applicant spent the first part of his adult life in the Indian Navy, but came to the 
U.S. in search of a better life. By hard work and initiative, he appears to have achieved 
the American dream. He is financially secure, his children are well-educated and 
successful, his wife is happy, and he is highly respected by colleagues in his field.  He 
loves the U.S. for its religious, economic, educational, and political freedom. He has two 
siblings who are U.S. citizens, another who aspires to follow her children to the U.S. and 
become a U.S. citizen, and another who holds a green card. While he has financial 
interests in India, those interests pale when compared to his financial interests in the 
U.S. Many years ago, he defied family, culture, and tradition to marry his wife. His ties 
to his sisters, nephews, and nieces in India are heavily outweighed by his strong ties to 
his family in the U.S. and his passionate attachment to the U.S. and its values. His 
testimony at the hearing was sincere, intense, and credible. He is talented and 
dedicated, and the interests of the U.S. would be advanced by using his talent and 
dedication. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
