He resigned the questionnaire on March 24, 2006 and May 25, 2006.
1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ADP Case No. 07-07812
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on
November 28, 2005.  On November 1, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and1
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness
concerns under Guidelines F, E, and J for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 5, 2007, and elected
to have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel
The Government submitted 14 documents in support of its case.
2
2
submitted the Government’s written case on February 29, 2008.  Applicant received a2
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on March 4, 2008, and was provided the
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
Government’s case. Applicant submitted additional material. I received the case
assignment on April 7, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶ 1.r, alleging
Applicant is indebted to a company on an automobile loan account that was initially
referred to another company for collection in about July 2003 and subsequently
charged off in the amount of $10,952.88. As of August 21, 2007, this debt has not ben
paid. Applicant was provided notice of the amendment and filed no objection.
Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 16, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1,e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, 1.m, 1.p, 1.q, 2.a, 2.b(2) and
(4). He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, 2.b(1) and (3) of
the SOR (Item 2). He neither admitted no denied the allegations of subparagraph 3.a.
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a public
trust position.  
Applicant is a 41-year old employee of a defense contractor. He initially
submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions, on November 25, 2005, which he
resigned and certified on March 24, 2006, and May 25, 2006 (Item 4). He served in the
National Guard from 1988 until 1998. He served in the U.S. Army from January 1998
until February 2000, and he held a security clearance (Id). He is divorced with one child.
In 1999 and 2000, while in the military, Applicant was charged with domestic
assault offenses on three separate occasions. Specifically, on October 20, 1999, he
and his wife were engaged in a verbal exchange which turned into a physical altercation
when Applicant slapped his wife in the face, grabbed her and threw her on the floor
(Item 8). He was charged with assault (domestic disturbance) (Item 9). On November 7,
1999, Applicant struck his wife in the head area with an open and closed fist (Item10).
He was charged with aggravated assault. On January 9, 2000, Applicant was again
involved in a verbal altercation with his wife when he struck her. He was charged with
assault (domestic disturbance with injuries (Item 12). He explained that his wife
committed adultery on many occasions and he is guilty of not handling the situation in a
better way. He believed the anger was justified but he reported that he took anger
management classes. Applicant believes these incidents were removed from his record.
This includes the amount  in amended allegation 1.r.
3
3
Applicant has worked for his current employer since November 2005. He
reported a period of unemployment from February 2000 until April 2000, and April 2004
until sometime in 2005 on his security application. 
The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,202.88.
Applicant admits to approximately $19,000 in delinquent debt.   Applicant asserts that3
the accounts in allegations ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1,j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.n, are
either unknown to him or he has never been contacted by the creditor. Applicant alleges
the debt in ¶ 1.f is paid (ARMY COM CTR) because “the military does not allow
discharge before all bills/debts have been paid.” In response to some allegations,
Applicant states he is willing to resolve the debt if contacted. Applicant provided no
documentation of payment or payment plan for any of the debts (Item 5).
When Applicant signed his Standard Form SF 85P, Questionnaire for Public
Trust Position on three separate dates, he answered “no” to questions 20 and 22
concerning his police record and financial delinquencies.
Applicant denied having been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts
within the prior 7 years. Applicant explained in his answer to his interrogatories that he
had no idea of the debts until he was confronted with this information. He maintains that
he has never been contacted by any of the creditors so that he would have an
opportunity to resolve the debts (Item 5). He also had inconsistent responses in the
interrogatories compared to his admission and denials in the answer to the SOR. For
example, he would admit the debt, but then state in the interrogatory that he has done
nothing to resolve it because he was not aware of the debt.
Applicant did not list any arrests and/or charges on his SF 85P, because he
believed it was removed from his record. He further explained the “military incident” was
of a personal nature.
In January 2006, Applicant was charged and arrested with driving under a
suspension. He admits to this violation in his response to the FORM. He was fined
$647.50. However, he did not list this in response to question 20. Applicant’s reasoning
was that it thought the questions referred to felonies and not fines (Item 5).
In Applicant’s March 24, 2008 letter in response to the FORM, he asserted that
he is a trustworthy and dependable person who is worthy of a trustworthiness
determination. He regrets his poor judgment and admits some bad choices with respect
to finances. He does not consider himself a risk.  Applicant did not provide any
additional information concerning the reasons for his financial difficulties or his inability
to pay his delinquent debts. 
 
4
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
trustworthiness decision. 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
5
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations
is set out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated  delinquent debt on numerous
accounts charged off or placed in collection beginning in 2000. He admits to $19,000 of
delinquent debt that is not resolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.@ Applicant=s financial difficulties arose in 2000 and are ongoing at the
present. He accumulated delinquent debt but provided no reasons for the
accumulations. He did not present any evidence to persuade me that it is unlikely to
recur, nor that it does not raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment. The evidence does not raise this potentially mitigating condition. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above,
Applicant listed two distinct periods of unemployment in his application. However, he
6
did not elaborate on them, nor did he explain what, if any, impact it had on his ability to
pay his debts. He presented no evidence to show that he acted responsibly in
identifying and resolving these debts. I find this potentially mitigating condition is not a
factor for consideration in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant did not present any information concerning
counseling. He has not resolved his delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement.
I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions do not apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, Applicant offered explanations for his not listing the overdue debts
and the assault incidents on his public trust questionnaire. However, the explanations
are inconsistent and not reasonable. It is not reasonable to conclude that he was not
aware of the many delinquent debts over a period of almost seven years, nor that he
was never notified of the delinquent debt. He admitted to several of the incidents that
occurred with his wife when he was in the military. However, he did not list them
because he thought that they were to be removed from his record.  This leaves me with
the conclusion that he deliberately omitted them in the hopes that they would not be
discovered. I find that he intentionally omitted relevant information from his application
in 2005 and again when he resigned the application on two occasions in 2006. None of
the mitigating conditions apply.
7
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 30:
Criminal activity create doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 31(a), an “single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” may be potentially
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), “an allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted” may raise security concerns. As discussed above, Applicant intentionally
falsified his public trust application. He re-certified the information in May 2006. This is
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.
While the incidents of domestic violence are in the distant past and have not
recurred, they are not considered for mitigation purposes because Applicant lied on his
questionnaire. None of the mitigating conditions apply under this guideline.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant served in the military and
the reserves. He has been employed with his current employer since 2005. He held a
clearance while in the military. Applicant expresses regret for his actions and poor
judgment. However, he has not provided any mitigating information concerning his
financial problems nor his plan to resolve them. Moreover, he falsified his
trustworthiness application as recently as may 2006. This is a violation of Federal law
under Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, which is a felony.  
8
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.r: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
