 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-05795 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on April 3, 2006. On 
October 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and C 
(Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2007 and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on November 13, 2007. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 7, 2007, and the case was 
assigned to me on December 12, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 8, 
2008, setting the case for January 30, 2008. Applicant requested a continuance on 
January 22, 2008, which I granted. His request for a continuance and my order granting 
 
2 
 
 
it are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II.  DOHA issued a second 
notice of hearing on February 6, 2008, setting the case for February 26, 2008, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through P, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until March 7, to enable him to 
submit additional evidence. On February 29, 2008, Applicant requested additional time 
to submit evidence, and I extended the deadline until March 14, 2008 (HX III). Applicant 
timely submitted AX Q, and it was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
response to AX Q is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit IV.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 5, 2008. The record closed on March 14, 2008.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of adjudicative 
facts about Lebanon and Syria. The request and its enclosures were not admitted in 
evidence but are attached to the record as HX Exhibit V. I granted Department 
Counsel’s request, except for one paragraph based on Enclosure 9 to HX V, a report 
prepared by the Congressional Research Service. I declined to take administrative 
notice based on Enclosure 9 because there was no showing that the facts recited and 
conclusions reached had been accepted as not subject to reasonable dispute by any 
agency of the United States (Tr. 30-35). See Fed. R. Evid. 201. Enclosure 9 was 
redesignated as GX 5 and admitted without objection. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out below in my Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is the 46-year-old chief executive officer of a building material 
procurement and general contracting company seeking to do business with the State 
Department. He has never held a clearance.  
 
Applicant was born in Lebanon.  When he was 13 years old, he and his family 
moved to France. Applicant testified his father was an ambitious, self-made man, who 
saw that Lebanon had no future (Tr. 93). Applicant decided to attend college in the U.S. 
because his father had a high regard for U.S. education and had worked all his adult life 
with U.S. firms and organizations (Tr. 38). He came to the U.S. on a student visa, and 
obtained bachelor’s and master’s degrees from U.S. universities (Tr. 6, 38-39). He 
became a U.S. citizen in 1993.  
 
 Applicant’s spouse also is a native of Lebanon.  They were married in the U.S. in 
June 1992. She earned a degree in architecture in Lebanon, came to the U.S. around 
 
3 
 
 
1989, and became a U.S. citizen in February 2000. They have three children who are 
native-born U.S. citizens.   
 
 Applicant’s spouse has four siblings.  Two sisters reside in the U.S. and one in 
France. The record does not reflect their citizenship. Her brother is a citizen and 
resident of Lebanon and works for her father’s construction company (Tr. 67-68). The 
company does mainly residential construction and has no ties to the Lebanese 
government (Tr. 68).  
 
 Applicant’s mother was born in Syria and moved to Lebanon as a child.  Both his 
mother and father are citizens of Lebanon, became U.S. citizens in October 1993, and 
reside in France. His mother has never been employed outside the home, and has no 
affiliations with foreign governments. His father was an industrialist, manufacturing 
architectural building materials. He is now retired. He has had no affiliations with foreign 
governments or foreign armed forces.   
 
Applicant has regular telephone contact with his parents. His parents visit him in 
the U.S. once or twice a year and stay with him or his brother during their visits. His 
parents last visited Lebanon at least five years ago. They visited primarily to see friends, 
because they have very little family left in Lebanon (Tr. 69). They have no property or 
financial interests in Lebanon (Tr. 69). 
 
 Applicant’s older brother was born in Lebanon, completed his education in the 
U.S., and became a U.S. citizen in November 1993. His younger brother was born in 
Lebanon and became a U.S. citizen in March 2002. 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon. They have been visiting the U.S. for extended periods for 20 years, and they 
received permanent resident status in the U.S. in April 2004 (AX J, K; Tr. 60). However, 
Applicant testified his in-laws have deep roots in Lebanon (Tr. 95). Applicant has regular 
telephonic contact with them, and he testified he has “high affection” for them (Tr. 90). 
 
In 2007, Applicant’s spouse and their three children visited her parents for a 
week in Lebanon in 2007. His spouse and the two older children used Lebanese 
passports (Tr. 70). The third child, a two-year-old, traveled on a U.S. passport (Tr. 71). 
 
 Applicant has visited Lebanon annually, usually during the summer to visit family 
with their children. He used a Lebanese passport, even after he became a U.S. citizen, 
because Lebanon is the country of his birth. He testified he gained nothing in 
convenience or financial cost by using his Lebanese passport (Tr. 79). He used his U.S. 
passport for all other travel. At the hearing, he expressed his willingness to surrender or 
destroy his Lebanese passport (Tr. 78-79). He destroyed it in the presence of an official 
of the Defense Security Service on March 11, 2008 (AX Q). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 During a security interview in February 2007, Applicant told a security 
investigator he was willing to renounce his Lebanese citizenship (GX 3 at 3). He 
reiterated his willingness to renounce his Lebanese citizenship at the hearing (Tr. 60). 
 
Applicant’s company was formed in July 2003 to supply material to U.S. 
contractors in Afghanistan and Iraq. He and his older brother are the owners of the 
company (Tr. 84). His company has performed numerous contracts for the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers and the State Department (AX P), and it was named as the State 
Department “Small Business of the Year,” based on its performance of one of those 
contracts (AX D, N, and O).  
 
 Applicant’s company has been prequalified by the State Department to 
participate in new contracts for construction of classified facilities (AX L, M; Tr. 57). The 
State Department sponsored his application for a clearance (GX 4 at 3, 5). His 
application is supported by several senior State Department officials (AX B, F, H) as 
well as several business colleagues (AX A, E, G, I). State Department officials describe 
him as “honorable and completely reliable,” with “impeccable business and professional 
standards,” and a “stellar performer.” One colleague describes him as a person of 
“impeccable integrity, brutal honesty, and sound judgment.” All colleagues commented 
favorably on his honesty, integrity, and high professional standards. 
 
 Applicant and his spouse are active in their local church, local swim teams and 
soccer teams, and community services.  He coached soccer for several years at a local 
recreation center (Tr. 40). 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Lebanon and 
Syria. Lebanon is a parliamentary republic that has been in a state of war with Israel 
since 1973. Its foreign policy and internal policies are heavily influenced by Syria, who 
maintains intelligence agents in Lebanon and is a state sponsor of terrorism. The 
unstable political situation in Lebanon enables foreign terrorist organizations to operate 
within its borders. Hizballah is the most prominent terrorist group in Lebanon. The 
Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance group and 
political party. Hizballah maintains offices in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, has 
liaison officers to Lebanese security forces, and is represented by elected deputies in 
the Lebanese parliament. Hizballah is closely allied with Iran, supports a variety of 
violent anti-Western groups, and has been involved in numerous anti-U.S. terrorist 
attacks.  
 
 Lebanon has a poor human rights record. Lebanese security forces have 
engaged in arbitrary arrest, murder, torture, and other abuses. There is an atmosphere 
of government corruption and lack of transparency. Militias and non-Lebanese forces 
operating outside the area of Lebanese central government authority have used 
informer networks and monitored telephones to obtain information about their perceived 
adversaries. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
6 
 
 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s parents are dual citizens of Lebanon and the U.S. 
residing in France (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and b), his spouse is a dual citizen of Lebanon and the 
U.S. residing in the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.c), his spouse’s parents are citizens and residents of 
Lebanon (SOR ¶ 1.d) and he traveled to Lebanon in 1999, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 
(SOR ¶ 1.e). The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG & 6 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member . . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(a). A 
disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 
7(b). Finally, a security concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(d). 
 
Where family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002).   
 
 
7 
 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
 
 Applicant’s parents are U.S. citizens and they do not reside in a hostile country.  
The SOR does not allege any security concerns arising from their connections with 
France, and Department Counsel presented no evidence raising such concerns. 
 
 Applicant’s spouse is a citizen and resident of the U.S., but her parents, although 
permanent U.S. residents, also reside in Lebanon for much of the time and have deep 
roots there. Applicant has “high affection” for his in-laws and maintains regular contact 
with them. The presence of his in-laws in Lebanon and their vulnerability to abuse by 
Lebanese authorities as well as terrorists in Lebanon raises the “heightened risk” in AG 
¶ 7(a) and the potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 Applicant’s spouse resides in the U.S., where she is less vulnerable to terrorism.  
However, she visits her parents regularly in Lebanon, accompanied by family members. 
Based on Applicant’s ties of affection and obligations to both his spouse and in-laws, 
there is a “heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” 
exercised indirectly on him through his family ties. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 7(d) is raised.  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
 
8 
 
 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). This condition is not established because Applicant’s relationships 
with his in-laws are close, and they reside in a country with a poor human rights record 
where terrorism is rampant and a terrorist organization is part of the political structure. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1.  The 
Appeal Board consistently applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that an 
applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to make a choice 
between the interests of the family member and the interests of the U.S. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.”   
 
Applicant’s loyalty to his family and in-laws certainly is not “minimal.”  He is still 
connected to his Lebanese heritage, as demonstrated by his continued his of his 
Lebanese passport, but he has no love for the current government of Lebanon. He, his 
spouse, and children continue to visit family members living in Lebanon. The evidence 
is insufficient to establish that Applicant would be likely to resolve a conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interests if his spouse, children, or in-laws were threatened by foreign 
agents, Lebanese security forces, or terrorist groups operating in Lebanon. Thus, I 
conclude Applicant has not met his burden of establishing this mitigating condition. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant exercises dual citizenship with Lebanon and the 
U.S. (SOR ¶ 2.a), he has an active Lebanese passport that was renewed after he 
became a U.S. citizen (SOR ¶ 2.b), and he used his Lebanese passport to travel to 
Lebanon on several occasions (SOR ¶ 2.c). The exercise of Lebanese citizenship 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a is the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.b and c. Thus, SOR ¶ 2.a is 
duplicated by ¶¶ 2.b. and c, which plead the evidence supporting ¶ 2.a. When the same 
conduct is alleged more than once in the SOR under the same guideline, the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice).  Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 2.b 
and c in Applicant=s favor.   
 
9 
 
 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is as follows: “When an individual acts 
in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, 
then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful 
to the interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. Dual citizenship standing alone is not 
sufficient to warrant an adverse security clearance decision.  ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 
5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2000).  Under Guideline C, “the issue is not 
whether an applicant is a dual national, but rather whether an applicant shows a 
preference for a foreign country through actions.”  ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep 15, 1999). 
 
 A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited 
to “possession of a current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Applicant’s repeated use of 
his Lebanese passport after becoming a U.S. citizen raises this disqualifying condition. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” AG ¶ 
11(a). This mitigating condition is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by if “the individual 
has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” AG ¶ 11(b). Applicant told a 
security investigator he was willing to renounce his Lebanese citizenship, and he 
repeated his willingness to renounce it at the hearing. This mitigating condition is 
established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns based on possession or use of a foreign passport may 
be mitigated if “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” AG ¶ 11(e). The destruction of his passport on 
March 11, 2008, establishes this mitigating condition. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
10 
 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a loyal citizen of the U.S., deeply devoted to his family and a valued 
member of the community. All his immediate family members are U.S. citizens. He has 
established an impeccable business reputation and a personal reputation for integrity, 
honesty, and loyalty. The presence of his in-laws in Lebanon and the political conditions 
in Lebanon are beyond his control. He has taken significant steps to mitigate the 
security concerns in the SOR. Nevertheless, the presence of his in-laws in Lebanon, his 
bonds of affection for those in-laws, and his repeated visits to Lebanon, accompanied 
by his spouse and children, present a vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress that is not mitigated. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference, but he has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
