                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06070
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On October 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 22, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 2, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
January 30, 2008.  A hearing was held on January 30, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of three exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two
2
exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on February 6, 2008.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified
information is granted.
Besides its three exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of nine
documents:  Background Note: Taiwan, U.S. Department of State (April 2007); Taiwan:
recent Developments and U.S. Policy Choices, Congressional Research Service, Library
of Congress (October 2006); Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage 2000, National Counterintelligence Center; Press
Release, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (WD NY April 2006); Press Release,
U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (ED VA January 2007); Statement of Facts
[stipulated], United States v. Keyser, Crim. Case No.1:05CR543, (ED VA December
2005); Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency
OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS) (June 2004); Background Note: China, U.S. Department of
State (January 2007); 2006 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security
Review Commission (November 2006); Annual Report to Congress on foreign Economic
Collection and Industrial Espionage 2005, National Counterintelligence Executive -2005
(August 2006); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, China (March 2007);
Consular Information Sheet on China, U.S. Department of State (March 2007).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 2007); ISCR
Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 2006).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.   See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Taiwan.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evi.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Taiwan’s current state.  
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged (a) to have parents and a brother who are
citizens and residents of Taiwan, (b) to have a father-in-law and mother-in-law who are
citizens and residents of Taiwan, and ©) to have traveled to Taiwan from  approximately
June 1998 to July 1998, from December 1999 to January 2000, from December 2000 to
January 2001, from June 2002 to July 2002, from December 2004 to January 2005, and
from December 2005 to January 2006. 
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations.  He claimed to have no divided loyalties or foreign financial interests.
He claimed to have proudly used his U.S. passport to travel to Taiwan to visit his parents
and parents-in-law who are growing old.  And he claimed that Taiwan has not been
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or has not been
associated with a risk of terrorism.
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old senior engineering specialist for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born in Taiwan and immigrated to the U.S. in 1982 (R.T., at 34-35).
He studied engineering at a prestigious U.S. university and received both M.S. and PhD
degrees from the same university.  Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in July
2000 and received his U.S. passport in October of the same year (see exs. 1 and 3;
R.T., at 36).  He is uncertain whether he relinquished his Taiwan citizenship and
passport but is positive that it expired two or three years ago and cannot be used
anymore (R.T., at 37, 60).  Applicant believes it is possible that the Taiwan government
still considers him a dual citizen, but he is not sure.  
Before immigrating to the U.S., Applicant served as an infantry officer in the
Taiwan Army between 1980 and 1982 (R.T., at 37-38).  He received his discharge and
has no further reserve responsibilities, so long as he does not return to Taiwan to live
(R.T., at 38-40).  He has no contacts with individuals he knew in the military, and his last
contacts with the Taiwan military occurred before he immigrated to the U.S. (R.T., at 40).
Applicant has never been employed by national or local governments or intelligence
agencies of Taiwan or the PRC (R.T., at 40-41).
Shortly after immigrating to the U.S. (i.e., inn August 2003), Applicant married his
current wife (see ex. 1).  Like Applicant, his wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in
July 2000 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 43-44).  He and his wife have one daughter (age 18) who
was born in the U.S. and currently attends college at a local university (see ex. 1; R.T., at
44).  Applicant’s parents (ages 78 and 84, respectively) are citizens and residents of
Taiwan (see ex. 1; R.T., at 44-45).  Before their retirement, his father and mother worked
for more than 40 years for a Taiwan bank (R.T., at 45-46).  The bank was government-
owned before its privatization a number of years ago (R.T., at 46).  Neither of Applicant’s
parents have any official relationships or contacts with the Taiwan government (R.T., at
46-47).  Applicant’s father has no prior military service (R.T., at 46).  His parents each
have bank pensions (R.T., at 51-53).  They have no government pensions., but receive
health benefits from the Taiwan government (R.T., at 51). 
Besides his parents, Applicant has a younger brother who is a citizen and resident
of Taiwan.  His brother spent two years in the Taiwan military and may have some
reserve responsibilities (R.T., at 50-51).  Military service is mandatory in Taiwan.  His
brother is a sales manager for a Taiwanese appliance company.  His wife is a marketing
deputy manager for a cosmetics company (see ex. A).  They reside in one of the units of
a duplex owned by Applicant’s parents (R.T., at 49).  Applicant has no knowledge of any
military or government contacts by either his brother or his wife.  He has no known
relatives (immediate or extended family) residing in the PRC (R.T., at 51).
4
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law were both born in the PRC and
currently are citizens and residents of Taiwan (R.T., at 52-53).  The father-in-law
operates a school maintenance department; while the mother-in-law is a housewife
(R.T., at 53-54).  The father-in-law does receive a pension from a local city school district
(R.T., at 53).  Both in-laws were born in the PRC and moved to Taiwan in 1949.  They
each have relatives who reside in the PRC, but have no known contact with these
relatives (most of whom have  passed away).  His wife’s only surviving grandparent has
since returned to his roots (the PRC) to live (R.T., at 56).
Through his in-laws, Applicant has several brother-in-laws and sister-in-laws who
are citizens and residents of Taiwan as well (R.T., at 52-53).  His first brother-in-law is a
manager of a city library; while this brother-in-law’s wife is a lecturer in a local Taiwan
nursing school.  Another brother-in-law lectures in a local college, and his wife is an
administrator  of a Taiwan university (see ex. A).  
Applicant has no friends or associates who are employed by any foreign
government.  He has no assets or financial interests in Taiwan or other foreign country
(R.T., at 58).   By contrast, all of his assets are in the U.S.  
Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant made a number of trips to
Taiwan to visit his parents and other family members: specifically, from June to July
1998 and December 1999 to January 2000.  Since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has
made trips with his wife and daughter to Taiwan: specifically, from December 2000 to
January 2001, June 2002 to July 2002, December 2004 to June 2002, December 2004
to January 2005, December 2005 to January 2006, and more recently, December 2007
to January 2008 (see exs. 1 and A; R.T., at 59).  While it is not clear from the record
which passports he used after he became a U.S. citizen, he could not have used his
Taiwan passport to enter and exit Taiwan after its expiration in 2006, or thereabouts.  
Applicant maintains regular monthly telephone contacts with his parents (R.T., at 
47).  However, he has much less telephone contact with other members of his family.
He talks with his brother maybe once every six months (R.T., at 52), and he converses
with his mother-in-law and father-in-law only when he visits Taiwan (R.T., at 54).
Although, his wife talks to her parents every two to three weeks.  Applicant has no
reason to believe that any of his own family or his wife’s family who reside in Taiwan are
at any risk to pressure or influence from either the Taiwan or PRC governments (R.T., at
60).
Supervisors and co-professionals who have known and worked with Applicant for
a number of years praise his engineering and research contributions and commend him
for his integrity and trustworthiness (see ex. B).  His managing director  ranks him as one
of his top employees and a professional who has consistently demonstrated an
exemplary work ethic and personal integrity, and earned the respect of his peers and
subordinates (see ex. B).  Applicant’s supervisor credits Applicant with exceptional
integrity and trust and characterizes him as one of his department’s most valuable
research sources (ex. B). 
5
 Taiwan’s country status
Taiwan has a rich history that dates back 12 to 15 thousand years.  Dutch and
Spanish colonists claimed the island in the 16  and 17  centuries (see Background Note:th th
Taiwan, U.S. Department of State (April 2007)).  Migration from the Chinese mainland
over time supplanted the  aboriginal peoples of Taiwan.  Japan exerted considerable
influence over Taiwan following China’s ceding of Taiwan to Japan in 1895 (see
Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3).
Following the end of World War II in 1945, Taiwan reverted to Chinese rule.  Civil
war erupted soon after the reversion between Chiang Kai-Shek’s KMT government and
the increasingly influential Chinese Communist Party guided by Mao Zedong.  When the
civil war ended in 1949, 2 million refugees (predominantly nationalists) fled to Taiwan,
where Chiang Kai-Shek established a separate provisional KMT capital in Taipei (see
Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 3). Mao’s victorious Communist party, in turn,
established the People’ s Republic of China (PRC).
For the past one-half century, Taiwan has demonstrated steady economic
development and now is a major international trading power.  Its accession to the World
Trade Organization (WTO) in 2002 represented a significant achievement and
strengthened its standing in the expanding global economy. 
Taiwan exhibited steady political development as well since its establishment as
an island government. Changes reflect a continuing liberalizing process that culminated
in the tightly contested election of Chen Shui-bian in 2000 (see Background Note:
Taiwan, supra, at 3).   Chen’s DPP party won major parliamentary victories in 2000 and
again in 2004, enabling Chen to become the first opposition party candidate to win the
presidency.  Chen was re-elected in 2004 on a platform that included a “defensive
referendum” (Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 6).  Such referenda have been
historically perceived to be closely linked to the question of Taiwan’s independence.
Today’s Taiwan political system is a multi-party democracy under a Constitutional
umbrella comprising five branches: executive, legislative, judicial, control and
examination.  Taiwan’s reported human rights record and demonstrated respect for the
rule of contract in its commercial relations is quite good.
Taiwan’s PRC relations
The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is
only “one China” (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 6).  Despite differences over
the PRC’s one China policy, Taiwan and the PRC have enjoyed increased contacts over
the past decade. With Taiwan’s continued relaxation of its PRC policy regarding
unofficial contacts, cross-strait interactions have grown significantly.  Efforts by the PRC,
however, to resume cross-strait dialogue without any preconditions have been hampered
by the PRC’s insistence that the two sides first reach consensus that there is only “one
China” before restarting talks (see id.).  Cheng has recognized the PRC’s “one China”
6
insistence but to date has declined to condone the concept.  With both sides unwilling to
compromise this obstacle, they have cautiously felt each other out with smaller
intermediary steps like cross-strait cargo and passenger charter flights, sale of Taiwan
agricultural products in the PRC, and PRC tourists visiting Taiwan (see id).  
The PRC operates a large and sophisticated intelligence bureau, entitled the MSS
(see Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency
OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS), at 71 (June 2004)).  The MSS maintains active
intelligence gathering operations in Taiwan (see id., at 72).  These operations use
clandestine agents to collect intelligence on Western consortia investing in the PRC who
are suspected of involvement in attempts to democratize the PRC, as well as other pro-
democracy groups thought to be engaging in anti-communist activities (see Intelligence
Threat Handbook, supra, at 72). 
Compounding security concerns over the PRC’s robust intelligence gathering
operations in Taiwan is the PRC regime’s poor human rights record.  The State
Department reports an increased number of high profile cases in the PRC involving the
monitoring, harassment, detention, arrest, and imprisonment of journalists, writers,
activists, and defense lawyers seeking to exercise their law-protected rights (see China,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2006, U.S. Department of State (March
2007)).  The State Department cites a comprehensive, credible accounting of all those
killed, missing, or detained, reported incidents of deaths in custody, disappearance,
torture, and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment (see id., at 2-3).
While the PRC officially denies holding any political prisoners, Western non-government
organizations estimate that approximately 500 persons remained in prison in 2006 for the
repealed crime of counterrevolution, and thousands of others were either serving
sentences or were being detained for counter-revolutionary offenses (id., at 8).  State
Department advisories caution American citizens visiting or residing in China to take the
normal safety precautions and remain aware of their individual surroundings (see
Consular Information Sheet, U.S. Department of State, March 2007).  
In the current political environment, it is still too early to predict the direction of
cross-strait negotiations between Taiwan and the PRC.  Because of the PRC’s long
insistence on Taiwan’s acceptance of the ‘one China” principle as a requisite to any jump-
starting of negotiations over practical agreements in trade, cultural exchanges, and other
areas of mutual interest, future relations between the two sides remain cloudy at best.
U.S.-Taiwan relations
In a joint communique with the PRC in January 1979, the U.S. announced its
recognition of the PRC government as the sole government of China.  In this joint
communique, the U.S. accepted that there is but one China, of which Taiwan is a part
(see Background Note; China, U.S. Department of State, at 8 (January 2007).  The joint
communique stated that within this context the people of the U.S. will maintain cultural,
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan.
7
To implement the Joint communique, Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act
(TRA) in April 1979.  President Carter, in turn, signed the legislation into law on April 10,
1979.  Besides providing the legal basis for maintaining the U.S. unofficial relationship
with Taiwan, the TRA reinforced the U.S. commitment to provide defense assistance to
Taiwan.  The TRA expressly provides for the continued sale of appropriate defensive
military equipment to Taiwan and declares that peace and stability in the area are in U.S.
interests (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 9).  Although the U.S. terminated its
Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan following its de-recognition of the latter, it has
continued its sale of appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan (see id.).
While ambiguously written, the U.S. commitment to Taiwan’s security against
cross-Strait aggression by the PRC’s military forces is implicit in the TRA’s coverage of
U.S. responsibilities towards Taiwan.  This implicit construction is oft-used to support
proponents of a “two China” policy.  To be sure, initial actions of the Bush Administration
in 2001 provided cause to conclude the new President had abandoned longstanding U.S.
policy of “strategic ambiguity” in favor of a policy that placed a clearer emphasis on
Taiwan’s interests at the expense of the PRC (see Taiwan: Recent Developments and
U.S. Policy Choices, CRS Report to Congress, at 13 (October 2006)).  More recent
developments, though, reflect the smoothing of U.S.-PRC relations as a part of the
broader war on terrorism.  
Currently, the U.S. does not support Taiwan independence and opposes unilateral
steps by either side to alter the status quo (see Background Note; China, supra, at 20).
For so long as Taiwan’s national security remains under threat (both veiled and unveiled)
from the PRC, Taiwan can be expected to pursue the development of its military amidst
expectations of military assistance from the U.S.  Stressing self-reliance, Taiwan
maintains a large military establishment (accounting for 15.3 per cent of its central
budget).  Its principal mission is to defend itself against the PRC, which has not
renounced the use of force against Taiwan (see Background Note: Taiwan, supra, at 8). 
With its unchanged public policy of maintaining “strategic ambiguity” in its official relations
with Taiwan, the U.S. can be expected to continue its support of Taiwan’s island security
with the sale of defensive military equipment.
Taiwan’s economic collection practices
Based on past reports to Congress, Taiwan is considered one of the most active
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  In its 2000 Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, the preparers  list
Taiwan as well as the PRC among the most active collectors based on cited surveys (see
2000 Annual Report  to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial
Espionage, National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC), at 16).  Specific incidents are
cited  in the NACIC Report that identify offenders of proprietary information thefts and
attempts to acquire export-restricted products (see id., 7-10). 
Recent espionage convictions document ongoing collection activities covering theft
of sensitive and proprietary information by and for Taiwan companies (see, e.g., 2006
8
Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, at 139
(November 2006); Press Release, U.S. Department of justice, U.S. Attorney (WD NY
April 2006); Press Release, U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney (ED VA January
2007), and Statement of Facts (stipulated),  No.1:05CR 543 (December 2005). 
Multilateral export control regimes in place are voluntary and not universally adhered to
by member nations (see id., at 143).
Stress points between Taiwan, the PRC and the U.S.
In its November 2006 Report to Congress, the Security Review Commission
describes the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and exploiting the knowledge
developed by multiples of collection agents: legally, if possible, and otherwise illegally by
espionage (see 2006 Report to Congress, supra, at 138.  The PRC’s concerted efforts to
acquire sensitive technology poses a considerable challenge to U.S. counterintelligence
measures.  Recent indictments of Chinese citizens for espionage have served to highlight
the PRC’s spying activities in the U.S. (see id.).  Violating  its own 2004 U.S.-China
agreement, the PRC oft-fails to schedule timely end-use inspection visits of dual-use
items licensed for export to the PRC.  Better export controls can be effective only if they
are multilateral in scope (see id.).  Multilateral export controls and arms embargoes,
however, do  provide additional insurance against altering the cross-strait military balance
that has been long maintained (see id., at 144).
Without effective dual use export controls in place, the PRC can be expected to
acquire dual use technologies with military potential from the U.S. and Taiwan through the
U.S. and other source countries.  Reported intelligence, though, is lacking on any Taiwan
use of its collection resources in the U.S. to supply the PRC with needed military
technology (alone or through technology with known dual use capabilities).
Other stress points between the PRC and Taiwan are reflected in periodic PRC
military exercises in the Taiwan Straits (see Background Note: China, supra, at 19).  More
frequent U.S.-PRC high-level exchanges have the potential to reduce cross-strait military
tensions (id., at 19).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
9
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.”
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
10
ANALYSIS
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who immigrated to the U.S. from Taiwan in
1982 to pursue higher education goals.  Security concerns focus on members of
Applicant’s immediate family (i.e., his parents and brother) and in-laws who are citizens
and residents of Taiwan, a country  historically friendly to the U.S., albeit, one with a
reported history of economic collection activities in the U.S.
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s parents,
brother and in-laws residing in Taiwan, might be subject to undue foreign influence by
Taiwanese government authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s
possession or control.  Because Applicant’s immediate family members and in-laws
reside in Taiwan, they present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying
condition  (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence. The
citizenship/residence status of these immediate family members and in-laws in Taiwan
pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign
influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information under Applicant's
possession and/or control. 
Because Applicant’s father and brother both have prior military service (although
aged for the most part), some consideration of DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” is
warranted as well.  Applicant’s contacts with his parents, brother/wife, and in-laws
residing in Taiwan afford him some potential for accessing Taiwan officials who might be
interested in proprietary, sensitive, or even classified information that Applicant is privy to.
Still, none of Applicant’s family members have any identified affiliations or contacts with
Taiwan officials currently known to be associated with intelligence or military
organizations interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive information in the U.S.
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant’s
immediate family and in-laws residing in Taiwan have any political affiliations with
Taiwan’s government or military, have any history to date of being subjected to any
coercion or influence, or appear to be vulnerable to the same.  Applicant’s mother and
father worked for a Taiwan bank for many years before they retired with private pensions.
With the exception of their government-funded health benefits, his parents have no
financial interests associated with the Taiwan government.  While his brother and spouse
are employed by consumer-oriented companies located in Taiwan, they, too, have no little
visible connections with the Taiwan government or military/intelligence establishment.  
11
Upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his immediate family and in-
laws, any risk of undue foreign influence on Applicant and/or his parents, brother and in-
laws would appear to be insubstantial, and clearly not of the magnitude that could make
them subject to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under Guideline B.
Taiwan, although a country reported to have targeted U.S. economic and
proprietary interests in the past, enjoys a special relationship with the U.S. through the
TRA, and is a democratic government with a history of respect for human rights and the
rule of law.  While Taiwan has been a reported active collector of economic intelligence in
the U.S., it has not been known to use acquired information to harm U.S. strategic
interests.  Taiwan remains a member in good standing with the WTO, and a constructive
trading partner with the U.S., who at times has itself been targeted by agents of the PRC
for intelligence collection on Western groups thought to be promoting democracy and
engaging in anti-communist activities directed at the PRC.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are
citizens/residents of foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable
risk in one foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by
practical necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Taiwan. 
The special relationship that has existed between the U.S. and Taiwan over the
past half-century has been one marked by mutually reconcilable political and economic
interests. Reports of Taiwan intelligence gathering against U.S. companies are
counterbalanced by Taiwan’s history of friendship and partnership in a defense pact
formalized in 1979.  The mutually supportive bonds that have linked Taiwan’s special
relationship with the U.S. have not been weakened by either the TRA, or the  geopolitical
forces that have shaped the U.S.’s evolving relationship with the PRC.  Whatever
potential heightened security risks arise as the result of Applicant's having family
members with citizenship and residency in Taiwan are by every reasonable measure
mitigated.  
Taiwan remains a friend of the U.S. and is a country whose democratic institutions
are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for human rights and the rule of
law.  Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, the new ones do take into account the
country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging
whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a
heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter.  Taiwan, while reported to target the U.S. and its companies in
the past for economic and proprietary information, is still a country with no known recent
history of hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence against family
members to obtain either classified information, or unclassified economic and proprietary
data. 
12
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's immediate
and extended family members in Taiwan  (a country whose interests have recently been
and continue to be friendly to those of the U.S.), any potential heightened risk of a
hostage situation or undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either
classified information or economic or proprietary data out of Applicant through his family
members residing in Taiwan is an acceptable one.  Applicant, accordingly, may take
advantage of one important mitigating condition: MC 8(a), “the nature of the relationships
with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the persons or
activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” 
MC (8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or
the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” has application, too, to Applicant’s situation.  Both at home and through those in
senior positions with Applicant’s employer, Applicant demonstrated loyalty, patriotism,
and professional commitments to the U.S. since becoming a naturalized citizen in 2000.
Whatever potential conflicts he may have through his dual Taiwan citizenship and
contacts with his family members in Taiwan have been more than counterbalanced by his
demonstrated U.S. citizenship responsibilities.  
Whole person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflict
of interests with his Taiwan family members.  Not only has Applicant become a
naturalized U.S. citizen and received his advance degrees in the U.S., but he has made
every effort to work, save, and pursue his financial interests exclusively in the U.S.
Applicant is highly regarded and trusted by his managing director and supervisor and is
not aware of any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of his family members
might be exposed to.  
In Applicant’s case, any likelihood of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought
to bear on any of his immediate family members and in-laws would appear to be minimal.
By all reasonable accounts of the presented record,  Applicant has no visible conflicts of
interest with Taiwan citizen/residents or property interests in Taiwan that could be at risk
to exploitation or compromise by Taiwan military or intelligence officials.  
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's family members
and in-laws residing in Taiwan are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his
familial relationships in Taiwan.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B.
13
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a : FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
 CONCLUSIONS
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
