 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11506
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
On June 2, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance for his employment
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On November 9, 2007, DOHA issued
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),  which specified the basis for its decision –2
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (financial
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
 In accordance with Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 -4
8) proffered in support of the government’s case.
2
considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  More specifically, the3
government alleged that Applicant owed $16,193 for seven delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶
1.a - 1.g). On January 15, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, admitted with
explanation all but one (SOR ¶ 1.c) of the allegations therein, and requested a decision
without a hearing.
On January 24, 2008, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant
materials (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant4
received the FORM on January 20, 2008, and was given 30 days to file a response to
the FORM. He submitted nothing before the deadline, and the case was assigned to me
on April 7, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s attachments to his response to the SOR,
and the government’s FORM and the exhibits therein, I make the following additional
findings of fact.
Applicant is 39 years old and has been employed since December 2004 as a
technical technician for a defense contractor. He and his wife have been married since
November 1995. (FORM, Item 6)
Between April and July 2004, Applicant accrued $942 in delinquent debt for four
unpaid medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d), an unpaid satellite television account (SOR ¶
1.e) and an unpaid cell phone account (SOR ¶ 1.f). (FORM, Item 7) The information he
submitted with his response to the SOR showed the following:
- The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.c was paid as required and is reported in error on
Applicant’s credit report.
- Applicant paid the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.e in September 2006.
- Applicant paid the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d and 1.f in November
2007.
In December 2000, Applicant co-signed a car loan with his wife for a 2001 Nissan
Pathfinder. The car was repossessed for non-payment of the loan on November 2,
2004. The car was re-sold on or about 10 days after the repossession. Since then,
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
3
Applicant has been obligated to pay $15,251 as the difference between the resale and
the amount remaining on the loan. He has not repaid this debt (SOR ¶ 1.g). In response
to the SOR, he submitted an excerpt from his credit report on which he had circled the
reference to the fact the debt had been charged off as a business loss. He appears to
be claiming this means he is no longer responsible for the debt.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors5
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, these factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations) at AG ¶ 18.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient reliable information to support the
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.g that Applicant owed seven delinquent debts totaling
$16,193. The debts went unpaid for more than three years. These facts support
application of the disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
In response to the government’s information, Applicant showed the debt listed in
SOR ¶ 1.c is invalid and that he has paid the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d - 1.f.
The one remaining debt in SOR ¶ 1.g constitutes 95% of the debt alleged. Applicant
appears to rely on the fact the debt has been charged off as justification for not paying
the debt. He also draws attention to the fact he co-signed the loan for his wife to imply
he should not be held accountable for the debt. Whereas the presence of unpaid debt is
not per se disqualifying, the burden is on Applicant to show why the government should
not be concerned by his failure to pay his debts. While it is laudable that he has paid or
resolved the other debts, his payments were made after he was issued the SOR and
cannot be considered as being made in good faith. Nor does the information Applicant
presented regarding SOR ¶ 1.g justify his apparent inaction. Further, he has presented
no information about his income and expenses that would provide a more
comprehensive picture of how the repossession debt may or may not impact his overall
finances. 
As to SOR  ¶ 1.c, the mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) applies. However, there is no basis
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
5
for application of any of the remaining mitigating conditions. On balance, Applicant has
not mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 39 years old, has
been married to the same person since 1995, and must be presumed to be a mature
adult. However, there is no available information about his current finances, the reasons
he did not pay the listed debts in the first place, or why he will not incur delinquencies in
the future. Finally, there is no information in the record about his work performance,
reliability, judgment or other facets of his life relevant to a suitability determination. A fair
and commonsense assessment  of all of the information bearing on Applicant’s finances9
shows there are still doubts about his ability to protect the government’s interests as his
own. Because the protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, these doubts must be resolved in favor of the national interest.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
