                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 07-10634 
                                        )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is an Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since1992. Applicant’s four siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. For 14 
months, he acted as an interpreter for U.S. forces in Iraq. After a thorough review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and evidence, I conclude Applicant has rebutted or 
mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 27, 2007, detailing security concerns under 
Foreign Influence.  
  
 On November 17, 2008, Applicant’s answered the SOR in which Applicant 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On January 15, 2007, I was 
assigned the case. On February 11, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling 
the hearing held on February 20, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1and 2, 
which were admitted into evidence. Applicant and two witnesses testified on Applicant’s 
behalf and he submitted Exhibits A through H, which were admitted into evidence. On 
March 11, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to Iraq. The request and the attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─VIII.  
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Notice 
 
 Applicant was informed he was entitled to 15 days notice of his hearing. The 
Notice of Hearing was sent out on February 11th for a February 20th hearing. Applicant 
stated he was ready to proceed and did not need additional time to prepare for the 
hearing. (Tr. 10-11)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with explanations the factual 
allegations in ¶ ¶1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old translator who starting working for a defense contractor 
in October 20, 2004. Since November 2007, he has been with his current employer as a 
cultural advisor providing training to U.S. troops, and is seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. (Ex. B, Tr. 39, 40) 
 
Applicant grew up in the middle part of Iraq. In 1986, Applicant’s father, a school 
teacher, was executed by the Saddam Hussein regime. His father had spoken out 
against the brutal former regime. (Tr. 26, 89) Applicant was treated as a second class 
citizen from elementary school through college. Applicant’s mistreatment followed his 
father’s execution. The Hussein government had confiscated all of his family possession 
and made his family members dependent on the money sent to them.  
 
Applicant attended university for a couple of years and was then forced to join 
the “cultural college.” If a family member had been executed children or members of the 
 2
family were not allowed to become a teacher, doctor, or engineer. (Tr. 27) In 1991, 
Applicant—then age 20—was a student in the culture college when he joined the 
uprising against Saddam Hussein. His group rose up to take control of government and 
party buildings. (Tr. 28) Applicant is the only member of his group to survive. The others 
were killed in the streets. (Tr. 28) When that uprising failed, Applicant and his brother, 
who had also participated in the uprising, were chased by the Iraqi Republican guard to 
the Iraqi boarder. (Tr. 21) His brother was wounded in the leg. At the time of the 
uprising, the Iraq government determined those who rose up against the Hussein 
regime were no longer Iraqi citizens. (Tr. 49)  
 
Applicant and his brother were placed in a refugees’ camp on the Iraqi-Saudi 
border. While in camp, they did volunteer work with the United Nations high command 
for refugees and with the Americans doing translation. (Tr. 90) After 14 months, 
Applicant and his brother received political asylum and were granted access to the U.S. 
On August 7, 1992, Applicant arrived in the U.S. (Ex. D, Tr. 31) 
 
Once in the U.S., Applicant accepted any available job and applied for college 
admission. In 1996, he started attending university part time as his English improved. 
(Tr. 32) Later, Applicant was full-time employed while pursing full-time higher education. 
Applicant helped his family in Iraq overcome the consequences of the international 
economic embargo and the former regime’s bias against his family. Applicant’s family 
was classified as Class Z citizens because their father were executed and two sons fled 
the country to live in the U.S. (Tr. 107) The former regime punished his family because 
Applicant and his brother had fled the country. (Tr. 27)  
 
In 2002, Applicant earned his B.S. in pharmacy.  On January 9, 2004, he became 
a U.S. citizen. (Ex. E) He considers the day he became a U.S. citizen his birthday. (Tr. 
34) He feels he is part of the U.S. His U.S. passport was issued on January 13, 2004. 
(Ex. G, Tr. 50) He never had an Iraqi passport. (Tr. 49) 
 
Prior to 2003, Applicant applied at numerous U.S. government agencies offering 
his linguistic skills. He was hired by a defense contractor as a linguist and deployed to 
Iraq in December 2004. (Tr. 36) He spent 14 months with U.S. special forces as part of 
an assault team. (Tr. 25, 70) Except for a three-week vacation in the U.S. in July 2005, 
Applicant was in Iraq from December 2004 through February 2006. (Tr. 37) Applicant 
daily dealt with classified documents and the unit’s secrets of counter terrorism 
procedures. He was involved in locating and obtaining the release of an American 
civilian hostage. (Tr. 48)  
 
Applicant worked with U.S. ground forces in direct contact with enemy forces. He 
worked long hours in austere conditions with an ever present risk of hostile fire. 
Applicant has received numerous letters of recommendation due to his work in Iraq. 
Applicant was adept at operating in dangerous and fluid environments and was 
successful in providing needed information vital to the success of the Task Force’s 
mission. Applicant’s dedication made him an invaluable member of the team and 
provided his worth on every mission. Applicant is one of the best linguists in the 
business. (Answer to SOR) Applicant provided outstanding service, was always eager 
 3
to assist, was great to work with, always pleasant to be around, and an invaluable 
asset. His professionalism and work ethic is beyond reproach. (Answer to SOR) He has 
received certificates of appreciation for his outstanding performance and lasting 
contributions greatly enhancing combat readiness. He returned to the U.S. in early 
2006.  
 
For one month during August and September 2004, Applicant returned to Iraq to 
visit his dying mother. He had not seen his mother since March 1991. Applicant left for 
Iraq the same day he received the call about his mother’s illness. (Tr. 35) While in Iraq, 
his mother died. During his stay in Iraq, Applicant missed his apartment and his lifestyle 
in the United States. (Tr. 34)  
 
Applicant has three brothers and a sister who are residents and citizens of Iraq. 
His older brother, a mechanical engineer, is married to a teacher and has two children. 
(Tr. 25, 58, 60) His middle brother, a civil engineer, is married and lives with his older 
brother. This brother works building roads and schools for the Ministry of Planning. (Tr. 
64, 77) His other brother is a driver whose wife graduated from business school. (Tr. 59, 
60) He has never met his brother’s wife. (Tr. 60) His youngest brother, who was six 
months old when his father was executed, is single and is attending business classes in 
college. (Tr. 52, 60) Applicant’s only sister, a housewife, married in May 2007 and is 
expecting a child in 2008. Her husband works for a construction company as a driver. 
(Tr. 61) Applicant’s cousin who lived in Jordan now lives in Iraq. His cousin sometimes 
works for a construction company and also buys cars. (Tr. 61-62) His family now feels 
safe with the U.S. presence. (Tr. 81)  
 
 Applicant has not talked with his family since October 2007. (Tr. 62) He last saw 
them in 2004 when his mother died. His family had no telephone. (Tr. 78) During 
Saddam Hussein’s time, his family was not allowed to have a telephone in their home. 
(Tr. 24) Applicant never sent them any letters and any letters received from them had 
been opened. (Tr. 79) Starting in 2003, Applicant’s brother would make weekly calls to 
check on his family. His uncle had a telephone. (Tr. 92) Prior to 2003, his brother would 
make a five minute call every three or four months. (Tr. 93)  
 
Prior to the fall of Saddam Hussein, Applicant sent money may be three times a 
year to a cousin in Jordan who would give it to his family. (Tr. 53) He would send a 
couple of hundred dollars every once in a while. (Tr. 24) His brother in the U.S. sends 
about $200 a month to their youngest brother. (Tr. 100) The money was used to buy 
food, clothes, and medical supplies. 
 
Following the ouster of the former regime in April 2003, Applicant continued 
sending money to his family in Iraq. Applicant was stationed in Iraq and sent the money 
through Western Union (Ex. C) purchased in the military exchange. During the time he 
was in Iraq, he never contacted his family in Iraq. The only family member who knew he 
was in Iraq was his brother living in the U.S.  
 
 Applicant lives in the U.S. with his oldest brother. Applicant has his $40,000 in his 
saving account and $1,200 in his checking account. (Tr. 68) Both accounts are in the 
 4
U.S. (Tr. 44) He has no property outside of the U.S. and has no foreign investments. 
(Tr. 45)  
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Iraq is a constitutional, 
parliamentary democracy with a federal system of government. (Hex I) It is a republic 
with a freely elected government led by a Prime Minister. (Hex IV) The 2005 Iraqi 
Constitution guarantees all Iraqis basic rights in many areas. Iraq’s legislative branch 
consists of an elected Council of Representatives. Iraq’s judicial branch is independent, 
and is under no authority but that of the law. The focus of the United States policy in 
Iraq remains on helping the Iraqi people build a constitutional, representative 
government that respects the rights of all Iraqis and has security forces capable of 
maintaining order and preventing the country from become a safe haven for terrorists 
and foreign fighters. The ultimate goal is an Iraq that is peaceful, united, stable, 
democratic, and security, with institutions capable of providing just governance and 
security for all Iraqis and is an ally in the war against terrorism.  
 
The risk of terrorism directed against U.S. citizens and interests in Iraq remains 
extremely high. (Hex II) The Department of State continues to strongly warn U.S. 
citizens against travel to Iraq, which remains very dangerous. (Hex III)There is credible 
information that terrorists are targeting civil aviation. All vehicular travel in Iraq is 
extremely dangerous. The government was unable to diminish violent attacks, although 
large efforts were made to implement better security measures. (Hex IV) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 5
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG & 6) 
 
Applicant has three brothers and a sister who are citizens and residents of Iraq. 
In 2004, he traveled to Iraq for the first time in 13 years to see his mother before she 
died. He has provided financial aid to his siblings in Iraq. Having considered all of the 
Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable conditions that could raise a 
security concern are AG & 7. AG & 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and AG & 7(b) (connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
 6
 7
individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information) apply. 
 
The new Iraqi government relies upon the U.S. for support as it moves forward 
with its new form of government. While Iraq=s human rights record under Saddam 
Hussein was very dismal and some problems continue, its human rights record is slowly 
improving under the new government.  
 
In every case where a sibling lives overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is not substantiated. Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and few ties to 
Iraq. While he still has three brothers and a sister living in Iraq, he lives with his brother 
in the U.S. He has no financial or property interests in Iraq. He wants to help the U.S. in 
Iraq. Applicant=s ties with the U.S. are much stronger than his ties with Iraq.  
 
Applicant’s work as an interpreter supported the U.S. military mission in Iraq.  He 
spent 14 months with U.S. special forces as part of an assault team. Applicant worked 
with U.S. ground forces in direct contact with enemy forces. He worked long hours in 
austere conditions with an ever present risk of hostile fire. The Army holds his work as a 
translator in high regard. He provided more than language interpretation skills. He 
explained local cultural nuances and practices which greatly assisted the military in 
accomplishing its mission. During his time in Iraq, he worked very hard to help the 
Army. He developed a high level of trust with the Army. 
 
If a heightened risk exists because he still has siblings in Iraq, he has mitigated 
that concern under MC & 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) and MC & 8(b) (there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest). 
 
Applicant’s older brother, a mechanical engineer, is married to a teacher. His 
middle brother, a civil engineer, is married and works building roads and schools. His 
other brother is a driver whose wife graduated from business school. His youngest 
brother is a freshman in college. Applicant’s sister is a housewife, married to a driver for 
a construction company. Applicant’s cousin sometimes works for a construction 
company and buys cars. None of them are involved with organizations which seek to 
harm the U.S.  
 
During the 14 months Applicant was in Iraq, he did not contact his siblings. They 
have not experienced any repercussions from any source because of Applicant. There 
is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
 
 
 
8
                                                          
the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his close ties and his 
loyalties to the U.S., he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 
In the more than 15 years since he left Iraq, Applicant returned twice, once when 
his mother was dying and once to work as an interpreter for the U.S. Army. Because he 
guided the Army personal on local customs and nuances related to the spoken word 
and responded very well in highly dangerous situations, the Army views him as a 
valuable resource in helping it achieve its mission in Iraq.2 With his long absence from 
Iraq, he has few contacts in the country outside of his four siblings.  
 
While danger certainly exists for all who go to Iraq, Applicant and his siblings are 
in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in Iraq. The U.S. and 
Iraq governments have developed a close and positive working relationship. Iraq 
depends upon the U.S. to help in its fight to combat the developing insurgency and 
2In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
national security and can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign power=s attempts at 
coercion or exploitation. 
 
 
 
9
terrorist forces. The Iraq government is moving forward with democracy and developing 
a rule of law, with the assistance of the U.S. 
 
Applicant has no love for the former brutal regime. The Hussein regime killed his 
father, wounded his brother, and chased him to the boarder before he and his brother 
were able to escape. Because of his father’s execution and he and his brother’s 
presence in the U.S., his family was ill treated. He has no ties to any organization which 
seeks to harm the U.S. or to overthrown the existing Iraq government. Night after night, 
Applicant went in harms way to assist U.S. special forces in performing their duties in 
Iraq.  
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
he has four siblings living in Iraq. Accordingly, I recommend that Applicant be granted a 
security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
