 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 Although Applicant admitted the allegations noted in his response, he at the same time indicated2
those debts were either paid or were the responsibility of a corporation he previously operated.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-12683
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns caused by his financial problems.
On January 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by the DOHA on February 12, 2008,
admitted the SOR allegations contained in subparagraphs 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1k,
denied the remaining allegations, and requested a hearing.2
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on February 21, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued
on February 27, 2008, scheduling the hearing for March 20, 2008. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted four documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4, and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted 13 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant’s
Exhibits (AE) 1-13, and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was
received on April 9, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 62 years old and has been employed as an unexploded ordnance
technician by defense contractors since January 2006. The certificates and letters of
recommendation he submitted establish he has performed his duties in a commendable
fashion.
Applicant listed employment outside the defense industry in the security clearance
application he submitted in 2007 as the director of operations for an investment firm from
April 1996 to February 1998, the vice president of operations for a corporation from
February 1998 to March 1999, the customer service lead for an electronics warehouse
from August 2003 to May 2004, security for a homeowners’ association from April 2004 to
August 2005, and the assistant director of security for a community association from
September 2005 to January 2006. Applicant was also the president of his own business
engaged peripherally in the motion picture business from March 1999 to August 2003.
Applicant served on active duty with the Air Force from June 1963 to May 1967. He
attained the rank of Staff Sergeant (paygrade E-5) and his service was characterized as
“Honorable.” He served on active duty with the Army from February 1978 to April 1987. He
attained the rank of Sergeant First Class (paygrade E-7). His military decorations include
the Army Good Conduct Medal (3  award), Army Achievement Medal, Armyrd
Commendation Medal, and the Air Force Good Conduct Medal. Applicant served as a
Morse Intercept Operator in the Air Force. He served as an Explosive Ordnance Disposal
Specialist in the Army. Applicant possessed a security clearance and was granted various
high level security accesses while in the armed forces. No prior adverse action is reported
to have been taken to revoke or downgrade his clearance or any granted access.
Applicant has been married since January 1978. In the 2007 security clearance
application he submitted, Applicant reported two prior marriages that ended in divorce in
or about 1969 and in or about 1972. He did not provide any other information about these
marriages. He did not list any children from any of his marriages.    
The SOR alleges seven delinquent accounts, totaling $17,314, that have been
submitted for collection, and four delinquent accounts, totaling $29,472, that have been
charged off as bad debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted he was
personally responsible for two of the collection accounts, totaling $299, although he also
 The record does not contain any evidence to explain how or from whom the credit reporting agencies3
obtained assertions that Applicant had died.  
3
alleged they had been paid without providing any proof of payment either with his response
or at the hearing. He also admitted the business he operated from 1999 to 2003 was
responsible for three of the charged off accounts and one of the collection accounts,
totaling $36,373. Finally, he indicated he was disputing the remaining accounts. His
testimony and the information he provided in response to interrogatories propounded to
him by the DOHA (GE 2), indicate the basis for his disputing those accounts is that he does
not recognize the creditors. 
The business related accounts consist of a delinquent credit card debt and
deficiencies owing on two automobiles and a boat he allowed to be voluntarily repossessed
when the business failed. While he asserts the business was incorporated and the debts
were corporate liabilities that should have been solely the responsibility of the corporation,
he did not submit any proof to substantiate those assertions. To the contrary, Applicant’s
credit reports (GE 2 & 3) list those debts as being either individual or joint debts with the
sole exception of the entry of “Participant” in the credit report contained in GE 2 for the
debt alleged in subparagraph 1.f.
Applicant also suggests his financial problems may be the result of possible identity
theft as evidenced by a letter he received in August 2006 from the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) indicating personal information of up to 26.5 million veterans may have been
compromised by the theft of a computer. However, most if not all of the debts alleged in
the SOR predate the letter by years and could not have resulted from the theft of his
identity as a result of that theft. Further, Applicant admits all but five of the debts are either
his personal responsibility or the responsibility of his former business. 
Applicant also suggests that entries in the credit report contained in GE 2 that
indicate he is deceased somehow contribute to his financial problems.  Other than his3
testimony that he has had difficulty contesting those entries he disputes in his credit
reports, it is unclear how the obviously inaccurate entries about his death could have
contributed to his financial problems. Most significantly, they could not have contributed in
any way to the debts he admits he and/or his former business are responsible for and his
unwillingness or inability to resolve those debts.     
Applicant testified he contacted the creditors of his former business in an effort to
resolve those debts but was unable to make the payments they insisted on. He also
testified his bank refused to give him a loan to pay off those debts because he reportedly
was deceased. However, he was able to clear up the reports of his death sufficiently to
obtain a mortgage loan to purchase a house. Finally, he submitted a letter from an
attorney, dated March 17, 2008, who reported he is working to clear up the issue of
Applicant being listed as deceased by the various credit reporting agencies. (AE 12)
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.11
4
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations), with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this
case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,6
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the7
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to8
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id. at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
5
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access12
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant has numerous debts, totalling more than $46,000, that have been
delinquent for many years and either charged off as bad debts or submitted for collection.
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and DC
19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant admits he is personally responsible for two small debts which he claims
to have paid. However, he did not provide any verification of the alleged payments. He
admits over $36,000 of the delinquent debt arose from his former business endeavor.
While he asserts that debt should have been corporate debt for which he should not be
held personally liable, he failed to provide any evidence in support of that assertion.
Applicant sought the assistance of an attorney to clear up the issue of his reported death
in the credit reports as evidenced by a letter dated March 17, 2008, but has not actually
accomplished anything to resolve the issue. He also claims to have contacted the creditors
on the business debt and sought a bank loan in unsuccessful efforts to resolve that debt.
Applicant’s failure to take any meaningful action to resolve the numerous debts that
have been delinquent for years prohibits application of Mitigating Condition (MC) 20(a): the
behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC
20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances; MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts.  
Although Applicant claims to not recognize several of the creditors listed in the SOR,
he presented no meaningful basis to conclude they are not his debts that have been sold
6
to successor creditors. Accordingly, I conclude MC 20(e): the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence
of actions to resolve the issue has no applicability to the facts of this case. The remaining
mitigating condition is also inapplicable. 
  
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has failed to mitigate
the financial considerations security concern. He has not overcome the case against him
nor  satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-k: Against Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
