 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-12807 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations.  
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 23, 2007, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86). On January 
28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 5, 2008. In two separate 
sworn, written statements, dated February 12, 2008, and February 21, 2008, 
respectively, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed on February 26, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on 
February 27, 2008. A Notice of Hearing was issued on February 28, 2008, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 20, 2008. During the hearing, three 
Government exhibits were received without objection. Applicant testified, but offered no 
exhibits. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on March 28, 2008. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel noted that Applicant’s SSN in the SOR was incorrect and 
moved to amend the SOR.  Applicant acknowledged the error and the correction was 
made without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.d. of the SOR, with explanations.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old self-employed, independent defense contractor, and 
he is seeking to obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been divulged.  
He is married and has two adolescent children. 
 
From August 1995 until June 2000, Applicant had a successful career as an 
account executive for a large U.S. corporation.  In July 2000, and continuing until 
November 2001, he was a channel sales manager with another large corporation, 
earning about $180,000 in annual salary and commissions.1 Life was good and 
Applicant acquired the trappings and playthings of the wealthy, enjoying timeshares on 
a lake and owning the boat which he had purchased in May 1994 for over $145,000.2  
1 Tr. at 45. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 3 (Experian Credit Report, dated October 19, 2007, at 2, attached to Interrogatories, 
dated October 23, 2007). 
 
3 
                                      
 
alized.  
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant’s finances were apparently unremarkable until the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001 (9/11). Shortly thereafter, the division in which Applicant worked 
was basically shut down by his employer and Applicant was given a 90-day severance 
package.3 His financial position collapsed into a downward spiral4 and he was 
unemployed (September 2001 to December 2003,5 and again from March 2004 to 
January 2006)6 or under-employed. His financial condition improved briefly in 
December 2003 until March 2004 when he secured a position as a sales manager with 
another company with a salary of $110,000 per year, annu 7
 
With his own diminished or zero income, and his wife earning very little as a 
substitute teacher, his finances took an enormous hit.  Payments were delayed and 
some of Applicant’s bills became delinquent. Several tax liens were filed (and ultimately 
satisfied and released).8 After having made timely payments for about 10 years, he 
defaulted on his California boat loan and the boat was repossessed in about June 2004, 
and the timeshares, located in Nevada by Lake Tahoe, were foreclosed upon in June 
2005. His wife’s medical conditions (knee replacement and diagnosis of Bipolar 
Disorder) generated other bills.9  At one point, his indebtedness was in excess of 
$200,000.00.10 Applicant discussed his plight with an attorney and considered declaring 
bankruptcy, but decided not to do so because, in his mind, it was not the right option, 
morally.11 Instead, he chose to attempt to satisfy his creditors. 
 
In June 2004, Applicant was able to sell his residence in a western state and 
relocate to a southern state closer to the residence of his parents.  With the funds 
realized from the sale of his residence, he was able to pay off many of his delinquent 
debts. 12  
 
Although the SOR identified four purportedly continuing delinquencies, prior to 
June 2004, he apparently had an unspecified number of other debts.  The four debts 
listed in the SOR, and their respective current status, according to the Credit Report, 
dated October 19, 2007 (the most current one in evidence), are described below: 
 
 
3 Tr. at 40-41. 
 
4 Id. at 41. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. at 45. 
 
7 Id.; Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86, dated February 23, 2007, at 3).  
  
8 Government Exhibit 3 (Interrogatories, dated October 23, 2007, at pp. 50-52). 
 
9 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
10 Id. at 47. 
 
11 Id. at 48, 53. 
 
12 Id. at 45, 50. 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
 
SOR ¶ TYPE DEBT AMOUNT STATUS13
1.a. boat loan ($145,700) 
opened May 1994 
$73,808.00 repossessed Jun 2004 
“charged off” 
1.b. Visa card opened Aug 1994 $21,537.00 “charged off” Nov 2004 
1.c. timeshare loan opened Nov 2000  $10,187.00 foreclosed Jun 2005 
zero balance 
1.d. timeshare loan opened Nov 2000  $13,501.00 foreclosed Jun 2005 
zero balance 
 
While not as substantial as they were before 9/11, Applicant’s earnings have 
rebounded to a more reasonable level.  In 2006 he earned about $45,000.00, and the 
following year, he earned about $85,000.00.14 As a result of his financial situation, 
Applicant has changed his lifestyle and curtailed discretionary spending.  He maintains 
only one credit card (which has been in a current status since 1983), his vehicles are 12 
years old and paid off, and he no longer takes expensive vacations to Europe or Hawaii. 
He generally remains within a budget,15 and he has a monthly balance of about 
$2,341.00 in discretionary funds available for his use.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
13 Government Exhibit 3 (Experian Credit Report, at 2, 4-6), supra note 2, is the source for all information in 
this table.  Government Exhibit 2 (Experian/Trans Union/Equifax Combined Credit Report, dated March 20, 2007) 
was also reviewed but that report was older than the Experian Credit Report of October 2007, and not as easy to 
decipher. 
 
14 Tr. at 46. 
 
15 Id. at 55-56.  
 
16 Government Exhibit 3 (Personal Financial Statement, dated October 23, 2007), supra note 2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”17 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the heavy burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
17 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
6 
                                      
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant’s financial condition collapsed after 9/11 when his financial 
obligations, which had previously been addressed without difficulty in a timely manner, 
became overextended, and payments became delayed. He accumulated substantial 
delinquent debt and was unable to attend to those obligations for an extended period of 
time. The repossession of the boat and the foreclosures on his timeshares, as well as 
the debts being “charged off” all led credence to a conclusion that the evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s 
financial situation prior to 9/11 was such that he could enjoy expensive activities without 
causing disruption to his finances.  However, shortly after September 11, 2001, his 
financial situation unexpectedly collapsed and spiraled out of control generally until 
2004 when it leveled off. He accumulated substantial delinquent debt due, in large 
measure, to lengthy and sporadic unemployment and underemployment, as well as to 
his wife=s medical issues. These circumstances are no longer extant. I find the behavior 
occurred under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not 
raise concerns about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The 
evidence establishes this mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ As noted above, the financial problems arose because of the 
devastating impact 9/11 had on the economy, in general, and his employer, specifically, 
his lengthy and sporadic periods of unemployment and underemployment, and his 
wife=s medical issues. He acted responsibly in identifying and eventually resolving his 
debts. I find this mitigating condition applies in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
 
7 
                                      
 
s. 
                                                          
otherwise resolve debts.@18 Applicant consulted with an attorney regarding his financial 
delinquencies and considered filing bankruptcy to eliminate those debts. Rather than 
taking the easy way out, he rejected such action on moral grounds.  Instead, he sold his 
residence and resolved nearly all the delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement. 
While his level of income may not have reached the one he had before 9/11, his actions 
in addressing his debts, while too slow or incomplete for the Government, indicate 
good-faith efforts on his part as well as showing clear indications the problem is now 
largely under control.  I find these mitigating conditions partially apply in this case. 
 
The Government attributes substantial importance and credibility to entries in the 
Credit Reports and appears concerned that Applicant permitted the $73,808.00 balance 
of the loan for his repossessed boat, and the unpaid $21,537.00 balance of his credit 
card to be “charged off.”19 Also, that he defaulted on a combined $23,688.00 balance 
on his foreclosed timeshare
 
As to the boat repossession (and its “charged off” balance) and the “charged off” 
credit card balance, it appears the debts were never reduced to judgments and, in the 
case of the boat, the repossession served to give title to the boat to the creditor, the 
original lender, a bank located in California. 
 
In the case of the credit card or open-ended contract, the creditor, also a bank 
located in California, merely charged the delinquent balance off in November 2004. 
While the credit report may reflect the balances as delinquent, as of September 2007, it 
appears the debts are barred by California’s 4-year statute of limitations,20 making them 
legally uncollectible.21 
18 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
19 It is commonly acknowledged that a “charge off” is a practice where the creditor gives up on collection 
efforts, takes a tax write-off on the debt, and/or sells the debt to a third party.  The debt still exists, but the creditor has 
received a tax benefit and possibly sold the debt to the third party.  
  
20 See Cal. Code Ann. § 337 (2008) (written obligation; four years) and Lynch v. Watson, 78 Cal. App. 2d 96, 
177 P. 2d 657 (1947) (action for breach of contract is barred where it commenced more than four years after 
execution and breach of contract). 
 
21 The South Carolina Court of Appeals succinctly explained the societal and judicial value of application of 
the statute of limitations: 
 
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that they stimulate activity, 
punish negligence and promote repose by giving security and stability to human affairs.  The 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
As to the Applicant’s interests in the Nevada timeshares that have been 
foreclosed in June 2005, those foreclosure actions appear to have been accomplished 
as non-judicial foreclosures under deeds of trust,22 and they caused him to forfeit the 
equity in those timeshares he had held prior to the foreclosures. The creditor took 
ownership of the timeshares, and as reflected in the credit report, there are no 
outstanding balances. If there had been, that fact does not appear in the Credit Reports 
and the creditor never approached the Applicant seeking payment for any purported 
deficiency. Any such action at this late date are barred by Nevada’s 6-month statute of 
limitations pertaining to deficiencies,23 making them legally uncollectible. 
 
I have reviewed the two Credit Reports in evidence, and even with extensive 
experience in deciphering the entries, found them to be garbled and internally 
inconsistent, with minimum indicia of reliability.  There is no indication as to the 
source(s) of the information appearing therein, for as the Experian Credit Report states:  
“Experian collects and organizes information about you and your credit history from 
public records, your creditors and other reliable sources.”24 The combined report does 
not disclose even that much information. Thus, the factual or legal accuracy, currency, 
or reliability of the information is left to mere speculation. Accordingly, they are 
unreliable and untrustworthy, and in this particular instance, inaccurate as well.  
 
Applicant is now financially sound and prepared for future contingencies. I 
conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
cornerstone policy consideration underlying statutes of limitations is the laudable goal of law to 
promote and achieve finality in litigation.  Significantly, statutes of limitations provide potential 
defendants with certainty that after a set period of time, they will not be ha[iled] into court to defend 
time-barred claims.  Moreover, limitations periods discourage plaintiffs from sitting on their rights.  
Statutes of limitations are, indeed, fundamental to our judicial system. 
   
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 363 S.C. 169, 175-76, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 (S.C. Ct. App. 2005) (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). 
 
22 See Nev. Rev. Stat.  § 119A.170 (4) (2001) (The “real property” and “real estate” as used in Nev. Rev. 
Stat. Ch. 645 shall be deemed to include a timeshare, whether it is an interest in real property or merely a contractual 
right to occupancy).  See also Nev. Rev. Stat.  § 107.080 (2007) (discussing default and sale under deeds of trust). 
 
23 See Nev. Rev. Stat.  § 40.455 (1987) (The deficiency judgment must be sought within six months after the 
date of foreclosure).  
 
24 Government Exhibit 3 (Experian Credit Report, at 1), supra note 2. 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began, 
Applicant was a very successful professional earning $180,000.00 per year. (See AG & 
2(a)(4).) He accumulated extensive debt due to circumstances largely beyond his 
control, including the negative economic impact on the national economy and his 
employer, as well as lengthy and sporadic periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, and his wife=s medical issues. (See AG & 2(a)(2).)  Although limited 
by his circumstances, since that time, Applicant has undergone significant behavioral 
changes. He changed his lifestyle and curtailed discretionary spending. But most 
significantly, he has taken affirmative action and made substantial good-faith efforts to 
pay off or resolve most of his delinquent debts, including those raising security 
concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) While it is the Government’s contentions that he still has 
the four outstanding debts identified in the SOR, those debts were never reduced to 
judgments and the Statute of Limitations for each of the debts has expired, making them 
uncollectible. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Thus, these debts cannot be sources of improper 
pressure or duress. 
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are resolved; it is whether 
his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
I am mindful that while any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
credit history in a sympathetic light, I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.25 Considering what Applicant has gone through financially and emotionally, 
and mindful of his refusal to simply walk away from his debts through bankruptcy, and 
aware of his continuing good-faith efforts, and altered lifestyle, his past financial 
situation is insufficient to raise continuing security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
25 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006) 
 
10 
                                      
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
