 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-10312 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on January 5, 2006. On 
November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 10, 2007; answered it 
on January 2, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on January 7, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on January 31, 2008, and the case was assigned an administrative judge on February 
4, 2008. It was reassigned to me on February 6, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on February 7, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 29, 2008. 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record 
open until March 17, 2008, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted AX A through N, and they were admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s responses to AX A through N are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits 
(HX) I and II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 10, 2008. The 
record closed on March 17, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Unauthenticated Report of Investigation 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 4, a personal subject interview extracted from a 
report of investigation, without calling an authenticating witness as required by the 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, and he 
waived it (Tr. 28). Accordingly, I admitted GX 4.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except ¶ 1.e. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old senior designer, working for a defense contractor at a 
shipyard. He has worked for his current employer since January 1992. He has a high 
school education and some technical training. He is married and has a 28-year-old son. 
His supervisors describe him as trustworthy, knowledgeable, and hard-working (AX E, 
F, and N). He first received a clearance in March 1974. It was withdrawn during one of 
his changes of employment but has been restored since 1992. 
 
 During his career, Applicant has worked in shipyards throughout the country. 
While working in the southern U.S., he learned his grandmother was in poor health and 
was not receiving proper care. He moved to the northeast U.S. to care for her. He lived 
with his grandmother and remodeled her house. When his grandmother passed away in 
the late 1990s, his parents told him they had sold their house to his older brother and 
intended to move into his grandmother’s house, leaving him to find another home (Tr. 
32-33). 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a condominium. Shortly thereafter, the 
condominium complex was auctioned and sold, and the mortgage lenders notified 
condominium owners that their property was worth about half its previous value, and 
that they would be required to pay the difference in value (AX J at 1). Applicant was 
unable to refinance his mortgage, and he had insufficient income to pay his mortgage 
and credit card debts. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and received a discharge in 
December 1999 (Tr. 33-34). The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 When he filed for bankruptcy protection, he moved out of his condominium and 
leased an apartment. His relationship with his landlord became adversarial because his 
landlord refused to maintain the apartment. After the son of another tenant was arrested 
for making a bomb threat, Applicant decided to move out. The landlord wanted 
Applicant to buy out the remainder of the lease, and Applicant refused. Applicant 
apparently stopped paying rent. In November 2000, the landlord filed a complaint for 
eviction and nonpayment of rent and obtained a judgment against him for $2,781 (GX 
5). The judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
Applicant was unable to pay the judgment immediately because he did not have 
his checkbook or sufficient cash with him at the courthouse (Tr. 37, 51). In his answer to 
the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant asserted he had paid the judgment, either by 
check or money order, but he had no documentary evidence of payment (Tr. 39, 49).  
 
 Applicant testified he is unable to provide documentary proof that he paid the 
judgment because all his personal records were destroyed. After he moved out of the 
apartment, he stored his personal belongings and all his records at his father’s home, 
the same place where his grandmother had passed away. After his father passed away 
in June 2001, his three older brothers took all of Applicant’s personal property and 
records and disposed of them at the local dump (Tr. 38-39). At the hearing, Applicant 
stated he needed to “go back and quietly find out what’s going on.” He declared his 
intention to “write a check to [the landlord] this year and ask him to please go close out 
this documentation because I don’t need it chasing me into the future” (Tr. 50). 
Applicant did not present any post-hearing evidence of action to satisfy the judgment. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax return for 2001, and was notified 
that he owed more than $5,000 in federal income taxes (Tr. 58; GX 2 at 8). He testified 
that he forgot to file his income tax return because of the bankruptcy and the death in 
the family. In January 2004 he was notified he owed an additional $684 in federal 
income taxes. This tax liability arose because he did not realize that taxes were not 
withheld from his pay for off-duty teaching (Tr. 64). In September 2007, he initiated a 
payroll deduction to pay off delinquent taxes plus interest and penalties (GX 2 at 8). He 
failed to file his returns for 2002 and 2003 until October 15, 2007, after he received 
DOHA interrogatories about his financial situation (GX 2 at 16-17). He offered no 
explanation for his failures to file the returns for 2002 and 2003. He eventually received 
refunds for tax years 2002, 2003, and 2004 (AX B, C, D, and M at 1). He filed his 2007 
return on time and apparently is entitled to a refund (AX I). The delinquent taxes, 
penalties, and interest for the earlier years have been paid in full (AX H and M at 2-3). 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies and failures to file are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent cell phone service account. Applicant 
testified a dispute arose about charges for unwanted services that he did not know he 
was receiving. During a cell phone conversation with a customer service representative 
while he was driving his car, he became angry and threw the cell phone out the window 
(Tr. 41-43). He testified this incident “was a business part of my life that had nothing to 
do with my ability to maintain a security clearance” (Tr. 54). Applicant admitted the debt 
 
4 
 
 
in his answer to the SOR, but pointed out that he continues to have cell phone service 
with the same carrier and pays his bills on-line and on time (Answer to SOR; Tr. 70). 
The debt apparently was some combination of an early-termination penalty and the 
charges for unwanted services. The cell phone provider’s continuation of service and 
the fact that the alleged debt does not appear on his most recent credit report submitted 
by the government (GX 3) strongly suggests the cell phone provider’s claim was 
abandoned or compromised.  
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement on October 15, 2007, 
reflecting net monthly income of $4,150, expenses of $2,812, debt payments of $363, 
and a remainder of $975. His payments on a car loan, unsecured personal loan and a 
credit card account are current (GX 2 at 5). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
5 
 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 in pertinent part 
as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@  AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@  AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  AG ¶ 
19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@   
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). His failure to file 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2001, 2002, and 2003 raises AG ¶ 19(g). AG ¶ 
19(b) is not raised because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.”  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), (e), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago”) is established for the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.f, but it is not established for Applicant’s failure to file income tax 
returns, because he did not file the 2002 and 2003 returns until he received the DOHA 
interrogatories in October 2007. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established 
because of his multiple delinquent debts. The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is 
established for the bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a), triggered by an unforeseen and calamitous 
drop in property values; and the rent dispute (SOR ¶ 1.e), triggered by the indifference 
of a “slumlord” and Applicant’s misguided attempt to resolve the dispute by withholding 
rent payments.  
 
 The final prong of AG ¶ 20(a) (“does not cast doubt”) is not established. Applicant 
first received a clearance in 1974 and has held a clearance continuously since 1992, 
apparently without incident. He is highly regarded by his supervisors. He has weathered 
several personal crises, including the illness and death of his grandmother, the financial 
disaster involving his condominium, the deaths of his parents, and the destruction of his 
personal property, mementoes, and personal records by his older brothers. However, 
he does not believe that his personal conduct is relevant to holding a security clearance. 
He did not initiate his payroll deductions for delinquent taxes until September 2007, and 
he did not file his returns for 2002 and 2003 until he received the DOHA interrogatories 
in October 2007. His financial track record since 1999 raises doubt about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
 
7 
 
 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy was the result of an unexpected downturn in the value of 
his condominium, and he acted responsibly by attempting to pay his bills and then 
seeking bankruptcy protection. However, his remaining debts were the product of 
inattention, ill-advised withholding of rent, and anger directed toward his cell phone 
provider. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established only for the bankruptcy. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive.  If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. Applicant has not 
received counseling. His federal income taxes are under control, and his cell phone 
provider has apparently forgiven the charges alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but the judgment for 
unpaid rent is unresolved. I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is established for all the allegations 
except 1.e. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant’s bankruptcy petition in 1999 
was a reasonable and prudent response to the financial crisis he experienced. 
However, he did not initiate his payroll deductions to pay his delinquent taxes until 
September 2007, and he did not file his tax returns for 2002 and 2003 until he received 
the DOHA interrogatories in October 2007. Although the cell phone issue apparently is 
resolved, it was not due to any affirmative action on Applicant’s part. The debt for 
unpaid rent is unresolved. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the bankruptcy but 
not for the remaining allegations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has held a security clearance for many years 
without incident. The DOHA interrogatories motivated him to resolve his income tax 
problems. However, at the hearing he still persisted in his belief that the “business part” 
of his life had nothing to do with his ability to hold a clearance. He was candid and 
straightforward at the hearing. His memory of events was vague at times, clouded by 
the passage of time, but he was credible. His financial track record and his attitude 
about the irrelevance of his personal life to suitability for a clearance leave me with 
concern whether his financial problems will recur. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
