 
1 
 
 
                                                            
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-10601 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On January 8, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-
QIP). On December 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F (Financial Considerations), to Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 19, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On February 14, 2008, DOHA assigned the 
 
2 
 
 
case to me. A Notice of Hearing issued on February 29, 2008, and the case was heard 
on March 19, 2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
F into evidence without objection.  At the conclusions of the hearing, I left the record 
open until March 28, 2008, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
information. On that day, Applicant submitted three exhibits that were marked as AE G, 
H and I, and were admitted into the record without objection by the Government. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on March 28, 2008.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.m, 1.o through 1.v, 1.x through 1.cc, and 1.ee of the SOR. He denied 
those contained in ¶¶ 1.n, 1.w, 1.dd, and 1.ii of the SOR. He provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and married. He and his wife have two adult children 
and three grandchildren.  In 1974, he graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree 
in finance. In 1982, he earned a master’s degree in public administration with an 
emphasis in government finance. He was commissioned in the U.S. Air Force in 1974. 
He held a top-secret clearance from the time he entered military service until he left with 
an honorable discharge in 1986. (Tr. 71). After leaving the Air Force, he began working 
for a federal defense contractor in August 1986 that provided financial services to the 
armed forces.  As he no longer needed a top-secret clearance, it converted into a secret 
clearance. (Tr. 72). There is no evidence that he was involved in any security clearance 
violations during the thirty or more years he held a clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s wife began experiencing serious medical problems in 1991 when  her 
heart valves were replaced. In 1997, she had two transient ischemic attacks (mini-
strokes). In February 2000, she suffered a brain hemorrhage and in July 2000, she 
experienced an acute respiratory disease. Subsequent to those medical problems, 
Applicant began having financial difficulties, as he was working away from home and 
maintaining two households. In July 2004, his wife had a debilitating stroke. (AE A; GE 
4 at 14; Tr. 34-36; 66-67). He then took 16 weeks of leave pursuant to the Family 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) to care for his wife. After extinguishing that benefit, Applicant 
left his employer to continue caring for his wife from March 2005 through September 
2006. Because he did not have funds to pay his monthly expenses during that period of 
unemployment, he withdrew monies from his 401(k) plan to cover the costs. (Tr. 21; GE 
4 at 14).  Based on his retirement funds and his wife’s lack of payments into social 
security, she is not eligible for disability.  (Tr. 47; 67). 
 
 After returning to work in October 2006, Applicant’s employer assigned him to 
short-term projects that did not require a security clearance. (Tr. 30; AE C). (During that 
month, his wife broke her hip, resulting in additional medical bills.) He completed his last 
assignment in November 2007 and in January 2008.  His employer terminated him, 
pending the issuance of a security clearance. Over the past 36 months, (approximately 
 
3 
 
 
between August, 2004 to November 2007) he has been unemployed at least 20 
months. (Tr. 22). 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based on financial considerations, involving 
approximately $49,363 of delinquent debt, plus $18,000 of medical bills.1  Applicant 
negotiated some of the debt with creditors. (Tr. 26-27; AE E). He acknowledges that he 
owes approximately $16,087 in credit card debt and other expenses, in addition to 
$18,000 in medical bills. He currently owes about $15,000 in income taxes, most of 
which resulted from the early withdrawal of retirement funds.2 (Tr. 24). All of that debt 
remains outstanding, except for the taxes, on which he is making monthly payments. 
(AE D and E; Tr. 31; 61).    
 
 Although Applicant has not sought credit counseling, in October 2007 he 
submitted a detailed spreadsheet, itemizing all of his debts and expenses for the prior 
six months.3 (GE 4 at 16-17). He was not incurring any additional expenses at the time 
he established the spreadsheet and estimated his income to debt ration to be 16%, 
based on his previous salary. He also noted that 40% of his income is spent on his 
wife’s medical care.  Given his calculations, he projected that he would be able to pay 
all of his debts by the end of 2012, if he continued earning the same salary he was 
earning at the time he drafted the budget.  
 
 On March 27, 2008, Applicant submitted a revised budget, along with a debt 
repayment plan, projecting that he would be able to pay off all of his bills, including his 
wife’s additional medical bills, by 2013, should he resume his prior job and salary in the 
near future. (AE G). His estimated expenses are about $4,600 per month, plus an 
additional $1,000 for medical insurance that is not presently covered by an employer. 
His previous monthly net income was about $4,600 and essentially covered ordinary 
expenses and his debt reduction plan. He is not incurring additional expenses and does 
not use credit cards. (Tr. 58). He acknowledged that it is difficult to negotiate 
settlements with some creditors without a steady income. (Tr. 28-32). 
 
 Currently, Applicant continues to withdraw monies monthly from his 401(k) to pay 
his expenses while pursuing employment. Although he would like to maintain his 
position with his federal employer, he recently began looking for work in the private 
sector, as he is anxious to return to work. (Tr. 65-66). He understands that delinquent 
debt may raise security clearance issues; however, in this instance, he attributes his 
financial problems to his wife’s medical expenses and a lack of employment over a long 
period of time while caring for her. He emphasized that he never experienced financial 
problems until 2000. (Tr. 67).  
                                                          
1Many of the medical bills included in the aggregate $18, 0000 amount listed in SOR ¶1.ii are also listed 
separately in various subparagraphs of the SOR. Hence, there appears to be a duplication of the debts. 
(Tr. 29).  
2 The SOR alleged that he owed about $16,500 in unpaid taxes, but he has since made payments on that 
amount. (AE D & F). 
3 Applicant has a financial degree and background in “cost estimating as well as business process 
analysis, economic analysis, and cost benefits.” (Tr. 64). He routinely establishes and oversees budgets 
for clients, including the federal government.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt 
attributable to his wife’s medical complications that he has been unable to manage 
since 2000 due to long periods of unemployment. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. 
The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated 
when Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose 
around 2000 and continue into 2007. Because the problems are ongoing for various 
reasons, this condition cannot apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s his debts 
accumulated as a result of his wife’s serious medical conditions that began in 1991 and 
worsened in 2000 and 2004. Those circumstances were outside of his control. He 
presented some evidence indicating that he attempted to manage his debts by 
withdrawing monies from his retirement funds. I find this potentially mitigating condition 
has partial application in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
 
6 
 
 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Although Applicant did not present evidence that he obtained 
formal credit counseling, he established two detailed budgets, exhibiting his extensive 
knowledge of budget analysis, which project resolution of the problems within four years 
of obtaining employment. He provided evidence that he reduced some of the debt 
through negotiation with his creditors and established a monthly repayment plan for his 
taxes. I conclude these mitigating conditions should be given some consideration. 
 
Applicant disputed a couple debts, but did not provide documentation to 
substantiate his claim, as required under AG ¶ 20(e).  There is no evidence to support 
the application of AG ¶ 20(f).   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following: (1) the 
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 45-year-old man, who 
honorably served his country for twelve years in the military service, during which time 
he held a Top-Secret clearance. After leaving military service, he began employment 
with a federal contractor and continued successfully supporting the armed forces, while 
maintaining a Secret security clearance for another twenty years.  
  
In 2000, Applicant’s wife began experiencing serious medical problems, which 
placed a significant strain on the household budget. In July 2004, her problems 
intensified and ultimately resulted in an extended period of unemployment for him, while 
he cared for her and relied on 401(k) contributions for financial support. Subsequently, 
he has continued to pursue employment within the government and in the private 
sector. He credibly acknowledged his debts and expressed a desire to resolve them. 
Prior to this series of misfortunes, he had not experienced financial difficulties. Given his 
sophisticated knowledge and experience in financial management, and his current 
budget in which he is resolving his tax debt with limited income, I do not believe similar 
financial problems will recur while he seeks employment or after he obtains full-time 
employment. The Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 06-12930, “that an applicant is 
 
7 
 
 
not required to show that she has completely paid off her indebtedness, only that she 
has established a reasonable plan to resolve her debts and has taken ‘significant 
actions to implement that plan.’ ISCR Case No.04-09684 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul.6, 2006).’” 
In this case, Applicant has taken steps to pursue employment. Once he obtains a job, 
he will be able to pay the delinquent debts in accordance with his detailed budget and 
projected time line for resolving his financial obligations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant is an intelligent 
hardworking individual, who has experienced a series of unanticipated difficulties that 
have seriously affected his financial life. There is no evidence in his background to 
indicate that his financial problems may create a security risk. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.ii:  For Applicant 
   
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
