 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-11779
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns caused by his financial problems.
On November 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and
Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was
received by the DOHA on January 14, 2008. The DOHA notified him by letter, dated
January 17, 2008, that his answer could not be considered complete because he did not
properly answer the allegations. Applicant submitted a second response to the SOR that
was received by the DOHA on February 4, 2008, in which he admitted the allegations
contained in SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.y, denied the remaining allegations, and
requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 8, 2008, and
reassigned to me on February 11, 2008, to be heard in conjunction with other cases I had
scheduled in the same region. A notice of hearing was issued on February 27, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for March 20, 2008. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. The
government submitted four documentary exhibits that were marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-4, and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified and
submitted 1 documentary exhibit that was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1, and
admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to
submit additional documents in support of his case. Two additional documents were timely
received, marked as AE 2 & 3, and admitted into the record without objection. Department
Counsel’s forwarding endorsement on the additional submissions was marked as Appellate
Exhibit (App. Ex.) I and included as part of the record. The transcript was received on April
9, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 41 years old and has been employed as a sheet metal mechanic by
defense contractors since April 2005. He has proven himself to be highly reliable and a
very willing team member/employee who is considered to be an asset to his company.
Applicant was employed as a sheet metal mechanic by the U.S. Air Force from January
1992 until he was laid off in June 2004. He was unemployed from July 2004 to December
2004, and then worked as a machine operator until he was dismissed in April 2005
because he was unable to maintain production quotas.
Applicant graduated from high school in 1985. He served on active duty with the Air
Force from March 1987 to March 1990, and attained the rank of airman first class
(paygrade E-3). He served in the Air Force reserve from January 1991 to June 1994, and
attained the rank of senior airman (paygrade E-4). Applicant has possessed a secret level
security clearance for most of the time since he was in the Air Force. No prior adverse
action has been taken to revoke or downgrade his clearance.
Applicant married the first time in February 1996. That marriage ended in divorce
in February 2001. There were no children born of that marriage. He has been remarried
since October 2002. He has two children, ages eight and six, from this relationship.    
Applicant and his first wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in or about
1997. Although he listed continuous civilian employment with the Air Force between 1992
and 2004 in the security clearance applications he submitted, Applicant testified he was
actually laid off for about eighteen months beginning in 1997. While he found other
employment during the layoff, his salary dropped from somewhere between $14 and $15
an hour to whatever the minimum wage was at the time. Applicant successfully completed
the Chapter 13 wage earner plan and obtained a discharge in or about 2002. 
3
The SOR alleges 19 collection accounts, totaling $2,877, resulting from delinquent
medical bills. Applicant testified he experienced a number of medical conditions, including
diabetes, heart stent emplacement, and ankle surgery over the past ten years or so, but
that he always had medical insurance and paid the required co-pays before receiving
treatment. He has sent a letter to the various credit reporting agencies challenging the
legitimacy of most of these accounts, asserting they should have been paid by insurance
companies.
The SOR alleges another 16 delinquent accounts, totaling $5,884, that have been
submitted for collection. Those accounts range from charges for telephone and television
service to a returned check that appears to have been presented at a restaurant. The SOR
also alleges two accounts, totaling $1,531, that have been charged off as bad debts.
Applicant sent a letter to the various credit reporting agencies challenging the legitimacy
of most of these accounts, asserting they either do not belong to him or are duplicates of
other accounts.
The SOR alleges one additional account charged off as a bad debt in the amount
of $11,295 that represents the deficiency owing after the sale of a repossessed
automobile. Applicant admits he voluntarily allowed the vehicle to be repossessed and that
he is responsible for this account. He claims he has contacted the creditor and has started
to make payments on this account, but he did not provide any verification of a payment
having actually been made.
Applicant contacted a representative of his employee assistance program upon
receipt of the SOR and was advised to seek assistance from a consumer credit counseling
service. He then contacted a credit counseling service and was further advised he should
send a letter to the credit reporting services disputing all credit report entries that either
were not his or that he did not recognize as being his accounts. The letters referred to
above were recently sent based upon that advice. As advised, Applicant intends to contact
the credit counseling service after he receives responses to the accounts he has disputed
in an effort to establish a payment plan for whatever accounts remain on his credit reports.
Applicant submitted security clearance applications in May 2005 and May 2007 in
which he failed to disclose, as required, that he had any accounts that had been over 180
days delinquent in the preceding seven years or were more than 90 days delinquent at the
time those applications were submitted. In the 2005 application, Applicant did disclose a
criminal charge related to a bounced check, a wage garnishment, and the repossession
of an automobile. In the 2007 application, he disclosed the bounced check charge, the
garnishment, and that he had been fired from a job. 
Applicant testified he failed to list the numerous delinquent accounts in the security
clearance applications he submitted because he was unaware some accounts were
delinquent, he misunderstood some questions, and he was provided wrong information
when he sought assistance in answering the questions. His demeanor, appearance, and
manner of testifying make it abundantly clear he is very unworldly in such matters. His
 Department Counsel, on behalf of the Government, conceded in his closing argument that there was
2
not a deliberate falsification by Applicant in this case. (Tr. p. 82) 
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
4
explanations are credible. He did not deliberately provide false answers in the security
clearance applications.      2
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct), with their disqualifying and mitigating
conditions, are most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id. at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
5
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 1997 and, after successful
completion of a wage earner plan, obtained a discharge in or about 2002. He now has
accumulated numerous delinquent debts, totalling more than $21,000, that have been
either charged off as bad debts or submitted for collection. While many of the debts are for
medical expenses, others are for items ranging from telephone and television service to
bad checks presented at a restaurant. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations
apply.
Applicant admits he is personally responsible for the $11,295 charged off account
that resulted from his decision to allow the voluntary repossession of an automobile. While
he claims he has contacted this creditor and has started to make payment on the debt, he
did not provide any verification in support of that claim. 
His testimony that he had health insurance when the various medical expenses
alleged in the SOR became delinquent is credible. Notwithstanding, he did not provide any
evidence to indicate the charges are not uncovered expenses that are his responsibility.
Applicant sought the assistance of a consumer credit counseling service and, based on the
advice he received, sent letters to the various credit reporting services challenging most
of the delinquent accounts that appear in his credit reports. However, he has not
accomplished anything to satisfy any of those accounts or provided any basis to conclude
they will be resolved in any fashion in the foreseeable future. 
Applicant’s failure to take any meaningful action to resolve the numerous debts that
have been delinquent for years prohibits application of Mitigating Conditions (MC) 20(a):
the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC
20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
6
or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances; MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts.  
Although Applicant claims he does not recognize a number of the creditors listed in
the SOR and has submitted disputes to the credit reporting services to that effect, he
presented no meaningful basis to conclude they are not his debts that have been sold to
successor creditors. Accordingly, I conclude MC 20(e): the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence
of actions to resolve the issue has no applicability to the facts of this case. The remaining
mitigating condition, MC 20(f), is also inapplicable. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 15)
Applicant’s explanations for his failure to disclose his many delinquent accounts in
the security clearance applications he submitted in 2005 and 2007 are credible. Those
explanations, combined with the abundant adverse information he did disclose in the
applications, establish that he did not deliberately provide false answers in the security
clearance applications. Accordingly, no disqualifying condition under Guideline E applies.
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
his acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has failed to mitigate
the financial considerations security concern. He has neither overcome the case against
him nor  satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against
Applicant. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-mm: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-d: For Applicant
Conclusion  
             
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
