 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13897 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his illegal drug use. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 25, 2008, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on February 28, 2008. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
2 
 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 7, 2008. He responded on 
April 3, 2008, and enclosed performance appraisals. I received the case assignment on 
April 17, 2008. I have marked the performance appraisals as Exhibit (Ex.) A, and they 
are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 5, 2007, Applicant admitted both 
factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has a Bachelor 
of Science degree in engineering. He has been with his current employer since 2005, 
and his previous company from 2001 to 2005. He has never been married and has no 
children.1  
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency, from about 1994 through 
October 2007. He would smoke the marijuana on weekends at his home or with friends 
at their homes.2 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on August 1, 2006. He listed his marijuana use from 1994 through 
February 2006, and stated: 
 
My use of controlled substances is exclusive to Cannibus (sic). I’m willing 
to discuss this issue further if needed, in person. The take-away for you is 
that it is more important for me to modify my personal, private lifestyle and 
serve my country, than not.3 
 
 Applicant continued to smoke marijuana after he submitted his SF 86. He 
described his use of marijuana to a background investigator on February 5, 2007. He 
told the investigator that he made an effort to try and stop smoking the marijuana after 
February 2006, because he wanted a security clearance and wanted to be a law-
abiding citizen, but he continued to smoke marijuana. He stated that he would continue 
to try and stop smoking marijuana, but he did not feel that the government had the right 
to make him stop, as his marijuana use was a personal choice and no one had the right 
to make that choice for him. He stated that he did not feel that he was dependent on the 
drug. He claimed marijuana allowed him to become very focused without any negatives. 
He expected to continue to smoke marijuana on the same basis as he had for the past 
12 years, which was occasionally and only on the weekends.4  
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; Items 4, 5; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant continued to use marijuana after his background interview on February 
5, 2007. A statement was not provided but the interview was summarized in a Report of 
Investigation (ROI). He was sent Interrogatories containing the ROI and was asked if 
the ROI accurately reflected the information that he provided to the investigator. He 
certified on October 25, 2007 that it did. He was provided an opportunity to add 
additional information regarding the matters discussed during his interview and stated: 
 
Having read the adjudicative guidelines within DoD Directive 5220.6, I now 
understand the government’s position regarding drug involvement of 
security clearance applicants. I understand that disclosure of my personal 
consumption of cannabis may raise a security concern. In an effort to 
mitigate that concern, I submit herewith this signed statement of intent to 
immediately cease possession and consumption of cannabis.5 
 
 In his response to the FORM dated April 3, 2008, Applicant stated that in 
retrospect, he realized that his continued infrequent marijuana use between the time he 
submitted his SF 86 on August 1, 2006, and October 2007, was “an error in judgment.” 
He wrote that his continued use was “the result of substantial-work related pressure.” 
Applicant described a hectic and stressful work environment in which he was managing 
three major projects. He stated: 
 
For over a year I have basically been in damage control mode. There are 
more days than not that I leave work completely, mentally exhausted. The 
job I have results in significant personal stress. It has been my experience 
that, when used sparingly and in balance, consumption of cannabis 
significantly attenuates the stresses I incur from performing my job.6 
 
Applicant wrote “a signed statement of intent [not to use illegal drugs] with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” He further stated that he no longer associates 
with individuals who use drugs. He has taken up a musical instrument and takes music 
lessons and practices during his leisure time. Applicant submitted performance 
appraisals which indicated that he is a conscientious, dedicated, and valued employee.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
5Id. 
 
6 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
7 Ex. B. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
 
5 
 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana possession8 and use are sufficient to raise the above 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant admitted to using marijuana up until about October 2007. That is too 
recent to be mitigated under AG ¶ 26(a). Applicant wrote in his response to 
Interrogatories on October 25, 2007, and again in his response to the FORM, “a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” He states 
he has disassociated from his drug-using associates and contacts and avoids the 
environment where drugs are used. I find Applicant has done enough to raise AG ¶ 
26(b) as a factor in mitigation.  
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Marijuana must be possessed in order to be used. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana until 
October 2007, without regard for the law. He was 43 years old when he last smoked 
marijuana. He continued to smoke marijuana after submitting his SF 86 in August 2006, 
and after his background interview in February 2007. I considered Applicant’s positive 
job performance, the changes in his lifestyle, and his stated intent not to use illegal 
drugs in the future. However, he has not established a long enough track record of living 
drug-free to overcome the many years of drug use, poor judgment, and disregard for the 
law.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
