 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 07-11188 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-QIP), on 
September 6, 2006. On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 7, 2007, and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on February 6, 2008, and I received the case assignment on 
February 14, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 21, 2008, 
scheduling the hearing for March 13, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were received without objection. The Government also offered a “demonstrative 
aid,” which was marked Exhibit (Ex.) I without objection. Applicant did not offer 
any exhibits during his hearing, but did testify on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until March 21, 2008 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE A 
through L without objection, which were forwarded to me by Department Counsel 
by Memorandum dated March 25, 2008 (Ex. II). DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 21, 2008. The record closed on March 25, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanation except for 
SOR ¶ 1.c. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old security officer, who has worked for a 
Government contractor since December 2007. Tr. 15, 88-89, GE 1. He seeks a 
security clearance in conjunction with his employment. Tr. 15. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1990. Tr. 14, 84-85. He 
served in the U.S. Army from June 1990 to June 1999, and was honorably 
discharged as a sergeant/pay grade E-5. He served in the U.S. Army Reserve 
from June 1999 to August 2002. Applicant was married from May 1996 to August 
2002. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant and his ex-wife had twin sons 
during their marriage, age 14. GE 1, Tr. 85-86. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his security clearance application, four credit reports, and 
an interview conducted by the Office of Personnel Management. GE 1 – 6. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 10 separate line items, which included two 
judgments, one state tax lien, five collection accounts, one past due child support 
account, and one charged off account for a total of $13,204. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.j. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems stem from a costly divorce in 2002, 
uncovered medical expenses in 2004/2005, and unemployment/underemployment 
in 2006. He incurred significant medical bills in 2004/2005. His employer did not 
provide him with health care insurance and he was unable to pay his medical bills 
 3
on his limited salary working in security-related positions. Already financially 
strained following his divorce, he fell behind on his other bills to include child 
support. GE 6, Tr. 16, 75. He has sought informal financial counseling through an 
attorney-friend. Tr. 83-84. 
 
To address financial considerations concerns raised, Applicant has paid off 
five collection accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d. through 1.h.), has contacted three creditors 
and set up payment plans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.i., and 1.j.), and made a good-faith 
effort to resolve two judgment debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c.). Also, he submitted 
documentation that he has made payments on to these two creditors. Tr. 17-68, 
AE A – I.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. is $1,504 judgment. Applicant has determined this debt has 
been sold/transferred to a new company. As soon as Applicant determines who 
the new company is and has contact information, he will make payment 
arrangements. SOR ¶ 1.c. is a $1,320 state tax lien from a state Applicant lived in 
while he was stationed in the Army; however, he was never a legal resident in that 
state. Applicant has contacted a state tax official and is trying to resolve this lien. 
Response to SOR, Tr. 17-19, 29-35, 83, AE A. I did not detect any recalcitrance 
on the part of Applicant in resolving these two debts or any other debts. 
 
Applicant estimates he has a net remainder of “$200 to $300” after paying 
his monthly bills. Tr. 88. To minimize his costs, Applicant lives with a friend rent-
free and does not own an automobile. Rather, he takes public transportation to 
work. His brother loans him his automobile without charge as needed. Two of his 
three daily meals are provided by his employer. GE 6. 
 
Applicant provided three employer-related reference letters from his Project 
Security Officer, his former Site Manager, and a Vice President of a former 
employer. These individuals were uniform in their praise of Applicant and 
described him as “second to none,” possessing “integrity” and “trustworthiness,” 
“conducts himself on the job in a highly professional manner,” and “treat[s] clients 
with the utmost respect and honestly.” All three individuals recommended 
Applicant for a security clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
 4
                                                          
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as 
to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern 
is that an Applicant’s 
 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 5
 “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stem from a costly divorce, uncovered 
medical bills, and unemployment. He has struggled to remain financially afloat; 
however, given the unplanned costly life events he has experienced, it has not 
been easy. To minimize his expenses, he found a friend he could live with rent-
free, takes two of his three employer-provided meals at work, and does not own 
an automobile. For transportation, he uses public transportation and when 
needed/necessary, he borrows his brother’s automobile. Recognizing he was in 
over his head, he sought informal financial counseling from an attorney-friend. 
After he pays all his monthly bills, he has a net remainder of $200 to $300. 
 
 Applicant’s financial picture has taken a sharp turnaround since he incurred 
the debts identified in the SOR. His cost saving efforts and steady employment 
have provided him with the necessary respite needed to place him on the road to 
financial recovery. He now has the tools to achieve financial stability. 
 
 His work-related reference letters are noteworthy. It is clear Applicant’s 
employers view him as a conscientious, trusted and valued employee. He also 
makes a concerted effort to provide for his twin sons and remain involved in their 
upbringing. 
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt 
or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial 
breaches of trust; 
 
 6
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, 
high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of 
living, increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be 
explained by subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets 
or returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of 
gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay 
gambling debts, family conflict or other problems caused by 
gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
listed supra, two are applicable: ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude three of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable or partially 
applicable: ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances; ¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control; and ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.j.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
