  
  
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15222 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign influence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On December 19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 18, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 
2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 14, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on April 8, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one 
  
  
2
witness, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 17, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. Applicant did not object. The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in 
India. He has a bachelor’s degree from an Indian university. He came to the United 
States in 1980 to attend graduate school and obtained a master’s degree from an 
American university. He remained in the U.S. and obtained employment. He has spent 
most of his career since 1984 working for defense contractors in the aerospace 
industry. Applicant was married in 1983. His wife was also born in India. He and his wife 
became U.S. citizens in 2000. They have a 15-year-old child who was born in the U.S.1 
 
 Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens and residents of India. His mother is 73 
years old. She has never worked outside the home. His father has been deceased for 
about ten years. He worked for many years for a local government agency until he 
retired more than 25 years ago. His sister is a college professor and lecturer. Her 
husband is an engineer in the private sector. His mother-in-law and father-in-law are 
also citizens and residents of India.2 
 
 Applicant considers himself a good son and son-in-law. He and his wife traveled 
to India in 2000, 2001, and 2005 to visit their family. His mother has twice visited 
Applicant in the United States. Applicant talks to his mother about once or twice a 
month. When his sister and her husband were living with his mother, he would speak to 
them on occasion when he called his mother. He does not regularly speak to them now 
that they are not living with his mother. His sister has never visited him in the U.S. His 
mother owns two homes in India, which he estimates have a value of about $76,000. He 
has no foreign assets. Applicant estimates the value of his assets in the U.S. at about 
$1,000,000.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-28, 48; GE 1, 2; AE D. 
 
2 Tr. at 24, 29, 32-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE D. 
 
3 Tr. at 24, 36-43, 49-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
  
  
3
 A witness on Applicant’s behalf testified that he is an exemplary person, very 
ethical, and a loyal U.S. citizen. Character letters state that he is an excellent employee, 
highly ethical, and loyal. His performance appraisals have been superior.4 
 
India 
 
 According to its constitution, India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic. It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks have 
been committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. 
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive 
U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments 
or its use in military applications. 
 
The U.S. views India as a growing world power with which it shares common 
strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries and they are 
expected to continue to address differences and shape a dynamic and collaborative 
future. The U.S. and India are seeking to elevate the strategic partnership further to 
include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense cooperation, education, and joint 
democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 52-57; AE A-C, E, F. 
 
  
  
4
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
 
5 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s mother, sister, brother-in-law, and parents-in-laws are citizens and 
residents of India. India is the world’s largest democracy, works closely with the U.S. on 
many matters, shares common strategic interests, and generally respects the rights of 
its citizens. But it also continues to have some human rights issues, has been victimized 
by terrorist attacks, and restricted, dual use technology has been illegally exported to 
India. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and 
(d) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant came to the U.S. as a young man to further his education. He 
remained, obtained a successful career as an engineer, married, had a child, and 
became a U.S. citizen. While he and his wife still have family in India, their life and 
future are here. India is a democracy and strategic partner of the U.S. Technology has 
been illegally exported to India, but the Hearing Exhibits provided by Counsel do not 
show that coercion was utilized. I find that it is not likely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of the Indian government or his 
family members in India and the interests of the United States. I further find there is 
minimal conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are partially applicable. No 
other mitigating condition is applicable. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
7 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in India. He 
came to the U.S. in 1980 to further his education. He remained in the U.S., thrived and 
became an established, highly regarded engineer, with considerable U.S. ties and 
assets. He and his wife became U.S. citizens in 2000. They have a 15-year-old child 
who was born in the U.S. His life, immediate family, professional career, financial 
assets, and future are now here.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India. There is a strong 
partnership between the U.S. and India and they share common strategic interests. 
However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”5 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Also very 
important is whether the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
  
 India is a democracy that generally respects the rights of its citizens, but 
numerous serious problems remain. Like almost every country, including the United 
States, it has been victimized by terrorist acts. Restricted, dual use technology has been 
illegally exported to India, but there is no indication that India utilizes coercion against its 
citizens for espionage purposes. Many of our allies conduct intelligence gathering 
against the U.S. India would be jeopardizing its relationship with the U.S. by raising the 
stakes, and attempting to use duress against one of its citizens in an attempt to coerce 
a U.S. citizen to commit espionage. Applicant’s position, assets, and ties in the U.S. 
make economic coercion through his mother, sister, brother-in-law, or parents-in-law 
through his wife, extremely unlikely to happen. In the very unlikely event that a conflict 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
8 
 
arose, I am convinced that because of Applicant’s strong ties to the United States, that 
he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
