 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12181 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on August 15, 2006. On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 17, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to be proceed on 
January 15, 2008. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on January 
15, 2008. The case was transferred to me on January 24, 2008. On February 14, 2008, 
a Notice of Hearing was issued. It was held, as scheduled on March 12, 2008. The 
Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1-
4 without objection. The Applicant offered one exhibit which was admitted as Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibit (AE) A without objection. Applicant testified. The record was held open until 
March 26, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted a nine-page document that was admitted as AE B without objection. The 
transcript was received on March 20, 2008. The record closed on March 26, 2008. 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, and denied the allegation in ¶¶ 1.c, and 2.a.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for defense contractors for over 38 years 
and has worked for his current employer a total of 19 years. He is transitioning from his 
position as a safety, security, and quality manager to the quality assurance, and 
process improvement area. Part of his duties included serving as the Facility Security 
Officer (FSO) since 1982.  He currently does not have an active clearance but held a 
security clearance for about ten years in the mid 70s to mid 80s. He has two years of 
college. He divorced in 2000. He remarried in January 2008. He has four adult children 
and 11 grandchildren. (Tr at 4-5, 21-23, 48-52; Gov 1; Gov 2 at 5.)   
 
On August 15, 2008, Applicant filed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He answered, “No” in response to questions 28(a) 
“In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 28(b) 
“Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:  a $1,403 credit card account that was charged off in September 
2001 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Gov 2 at 6; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 5); a $1,769 credit card account that 
was charged off in August 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 7); a 
$5,312 delinquent account related to a repossessed car (SOR ¶ 1.c; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 
at 2; Gov 4 at 8); a $247 medical account placed for collection in October 2005 (SOR ¶ 
1.d; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 9, 11 ); a $1,041 credit card account, charged off in 
April 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.e; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 9); a $5,487 credit card account 
closed by the credit grantor (SOR ¶ 1.f; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 6); and a $2,980 account 
placed for collection in August 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.g; Gov 4 at 10.)   
 
Applicant states that he did not intend to falsify his e-QIP application. He believed 
that he did not have to list older debts.  He answered the question based on his current 
debt status.  He states all of his recent debts are current. (Tr at 12-18, 36-37; Answer to 
SOR.) 
 
Applicant claims most of the delinquent accounts were the result of his 2000 
divorce. He agreed to be responsible for the marital debt in order to be allowed to keep 
his home. (Tr at 47.)  Around the time of the divorce, a lawyer recommended that he file 
 
3 
 
 
for bankruptcy but he decided against it.  He states he has done his best to pay off 
everything that he can. He states he has paid off approximately $10,000 in debts since 
the divorce. (Tr at 47-48; Answer to SOR.) In 2000, his son was shot in the course of his 
duties as a security guard.  Applicant supported his family while he was recuperating. 
He estimates he spent $5,000 in 2000 to purchase groceries and other needs for his 
son’s family. (Tr at 70-72; Answer to SOR.)   
 
The first time he obtained a copy of his credit report was during his divorce in 
2000.  He obtained another copy of his credit report in 2003 when he refinanced his 
home. (Tr at 56-58.)  He discussed his financial issues during an interview with the 
investigator conducting his background investigation in mid 2007. (Tr at 58; Answer to 
SOR.) 
 
The current status of the debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: Charged off credit card account for $1,403.  Applicant refuses to pay 
this bill because he was overcharged late fees.  He charged $190 on account. His limit 
was $200.  The credit card company charged him late fees because the total was over 
$200 after the interest was added. Aside from the $190 in charges, the balance of the 
debt is interest and late fees.  He did not pay the $190 in actual charges. He had no 
contact with the company for over a year. Account remains outstanding. (Tr at 37-40; 
Answer to SOR.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $1,769 charged off credit card account. Applicant thought he had 
paid this off. He was approved for another loan with the same company. Account 
remains outstanding. (Tr at 40.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $5,312 delinquent account related to a car repossession. Applicant 
disputes this account. In approximately 2005, he cosigned on a loan for a used 
automobile for his fiance’s daughter and her boyfriend. Two weeks after purchasing the 
car, the car started to have mechanical problems. The car was turned back into the 
dealer. The principal signers on the loan have not paid the balance so the company is 
attempting to collect from Applicant as the co-signer on the loan. Applicant refuses to 
pay this account on principal. (Tr at 41-42, 58-60; Answer to SOR.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  $247 medical collection account.  Applicant was not aware of this 
debt. He has the money to pay the bill but wants to know what the debt is before he 
pays it. He is attempting to find out what the account is for. In his answer to the SOR, he 
indicated that it was a medical bill from a specialist and he thought his insurance 
company paid for it. Account remains outstanding. (Tr at 43.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $1,041 charged off credit card account. Applicant testified that he is 
not sure what this account is for. He has not contacted anyone to find out what the debt 
is for.  Account remains outstanding. (Tr at 44.)   
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  $5,487 credit card account that was past due and closed by the credit 
grantor. Applicant testified that he negotiated a repayment plan in 2001 where he 
agreed to pay $50 per month over 18 months. After the hearing, upon review of his 
records, Applicant discovered that he agreed to pay $20 per month. He paid using an 
allotment from his paycheck. In 2003, he requested the creditor send him a statement 
regarding the status of his account. The creditor would not send a statement pertaining 
to the status of the account until after the last payment was made. Applicant argued with 
the creditor and refused to make any further payments.  Account remains outstanding. 
(Tr at 44-46; 60-64; AE B; Answer to SOR.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $2,980 collection account. Applicant does not recognize this account.  
The account number for this account is the same as the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
It appears the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b transferred to this new collection agency. (Tr at 47, 66-
67; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 10.)  
 
Applicant provided a personal financial worksheet in conjunction with answers to 
interrogatories provided on October 4, 2007. After monthly expenses, he had 
approximately $995 left over each month. (Gov 2.) His gross annual salary is 
approximately $75,000.  Currently paperwork is being processed for his promotion. 
Once he is promoted, he anticipates making $100,000 per year. (Tr at 73.) He has not 
attended any formal financial counseling. (Tr at 76.) 
 
Applicant is highly thought of at work by both his peers and superiors.  He has 
received numerous awards and citations throughout his career. (Tr at 18-35; AE A.) His 
recent evaluation gives him an overall assessment of high contributor. Comments from 
the evaluation describe Applicant as “willing to go the extra mile.” He “exceeds key 
objectives and expectations.” He is “a can do self starter, who continually seeks ways to 
improve.” (AE B at 1-7.)  Applicant is also active in the local community. (AE B at 5; 
Answer to SOR.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
 
6 
 
 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting 
financial obligations since 2000. He currently has six unresolved delinquent accounts 
with a total approximate balance of $15,259. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. None 
of the debts alleged in the SOR are resolved. Although Applicant claims that these 
debts are old and that he is current on his recent financial obligations, his lack of action 
towards resolving his older delinquent accounts raise questions about his reliability and 
trustworthiness 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant’s financial 
problems began when his first marriage ended in divorce in 2000. During that same 
year, Applicant provided support to his son’s family. There were conditions that were 
beyond the Applicant’s control which contributed to his financial situation. The next 
question to consider is whether Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. It 
has been over seven years since the divorce. Several unresolved debts remain. 
Applicant has over $900 left over each month which he could have applied towards 
resolving these accounts. He took no action to resolve these accounts even after being 
interviewed during his background investigation in mid-2007. Applicant did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances. FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given less weight because of his 
lack of action towards resolving the delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant did not attend financial counseling.  Most of the debts 
alleged in the SOR remain unresolved.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.  Applicant took minimal steps 
towards resolving the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR.        
 
 FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) does not apply.  Applicant disputes several debts, among them SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 
1.c.  However, little action was taken to resolve the disputes. The issues remained 
unresolved at the close of the record.    
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent accounts to section 28(a) and 28(b) on his e-QIP application. Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 17(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) potentially applies to this allegation. 
Applicant claims he misunderstood the question and thought he had to list current 
delinquent accounts. His current accounts are up-to-date. He believed that he did not 
have to list older debts. He had no intent to falsify his e-QIP application. I find 
Applicant’s explanation relatively credible. I find for Applicant with respect to the 
personal conduct concern.   
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s outstanding 
work history and favorable work evaluations. However, an applicant with a good or even 
exemplary work history may engage in conduct that has negative security implications.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s financial situation raised security concerns. His 2000 divorce caused some 
of the financial problems, however, it has been over seven years since the divorce. 
Applicant’s efforts to resolve the remaining delinquent accounts have been minimal 
even though he appears to have sufficient income each month to apply towards his 
delinquent accounts. Although Applicant’s evidence of rehabilitation is insufficient at this 
time this decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or 
will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of 
a DoD security clearance. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a 
security clearance in the future and he were to arrange a satisfactory repayment plan 
with his creditors to repay his delinquent accounts, he may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of security worthiness. It is premature to conclude so at this time. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant    
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
