This is the latest security application that Applicant completed. She also completed one on November 26,1
2002, which is relevant in this case.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-15767
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 12,
2007.  On November 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)1
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F, E and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on March 11, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 28,
2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 17, 2008. The Government
At the hearing, Applicant stated that she was divorced in March 2007 (Tr. 122).2
2
offered Exhibits (GE 1-18), which were received without objection. Applicant testified in
her own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE A-M), without objection. DOHA received the
transcript on April 23, 2008. Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated December 17, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.k, 1.m, 1.p, 1.q, 1.s, 1.t. and 1.v of the SOR.
She also admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 2.a-2.j of the SOR but denied any
intentional falsification. Applicant denied the other allegations because the debts were
paid or she had no knowledge of them. She provided additional information to support
her request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
high school in 1982. In 1996, Applicant attended a business college full time one year.
She also received a certificate in 1997 from a computer center. She has worked for her
current employer since December 2006 (GE 1). Applicant held a security clearance
from 1997 until 2004 (Tr. 40).
Applicant married in 1986. After 12 years of marriage, she and her husband
separated in 1998 and remained separated for a period of 10 years.  Applicant’s2
delinquent debts started after her separation from her husband in 1999 until 2001. She
was trying to find a place to live for herself and her son. In July 2001, Applicant’s lease
was not renewed due to unpaid rent, and she was forced to move (Tr. 86).
Applicant had an altercation with the apartment representative one afternoon.
When she was picking up her son from school she was told that she could no longer be
on the property. An apartment representative presented her with a “piece of paper” and
Applicant shoved it back in his hand (Tr.42). The management filed assault and battery
charges against Applicant. She did not appear in court for the charge and a warrant for
her arrest was outstanding.
From 1997 until 2004, Applicant worked as a contractor (Tr. 54). She was
unemployed for six months from March to September 2005, but received unemployment
benefits.
Applicant was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2000. She received chemotherapy
treatment in 2001. She received disability payments during her treatment period (Tr.
56).
The SOR alleges 22 delinquent debts, including one tax delinquency, five
judgments, one car repossession and approximately 14 other delinquent debts. The
Applicant testified at the hearing that her wages were not garnished for 1.p debt. She made monthly3
payments and it is now paid. Thus, question 34 concerning wage garnishments would not require
Applicant to respond “yes”.
3
total amount of debt that Applicant owes is approximately $50,000 (GE 2, 3, 9-11, 13-18).
Applicant admitted that the accounts in allegations ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.j,1.k, 1.l,
1.m, 1.o, 1.q, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.u are not paid. Allegation 1.v for $11,718 is a student loan
in deferment. The loan was in default until she recently reapplied for deferment.
For the following allegations: ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.n, 1.p, and 1.t, Applicant
provided proof that she paid the accounts/judgments, in 2003, and the tax delinquency
in 2005 (AE E-K). Allegation 1.g is in repayment status beginning in April 2008 ($20 a
month) Tr. 72). 
The current status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is as follows: seven debts are
paid and, two debts are in a payment plan. She made an appointment for financial
counseling last year, but did not keep the appointment (Tr. 127). She was inconsistent
in her testimony regarding creditors that she contacted in the past few months.
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $2,348. She has a part time job that
provides an additional $300 a month. After monthly expenses of $2,403, and current
debt payments of $140, she has a net remainder of $245 (AE L).
Applicant completed her November 26, 2002 security application. In that
application she answered “no” to question 26. Your Police Record - Other Offenses, and
“no” to questions 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, and 39 concerning financial matters (GE 4).3
Applicant explained that she completely forgot about the assault and battery
arrest in 2001. She was stopped by the police for an expired decal. The police officer
then learned that there was an outstanding warrant for Applicant’s arrest for assault and
battery because she had not appeared in court for the charge. The court found her
guilty. She was fined $125. 
Applicant did not answer “yes” to any of the questions regarding financial
matters. She had judgments and delinquent debts at the time. She admitted that she
had no reason for not listing them. At the hearing, on cross examination, Applicant
stated “there was no reason and that she should have answered the questions” in the
affirmative on the 2002 security clearance application (Tr. 115-117). 
In January 2004, Applicant was interviewed as part of the security clearance
process. She reported to the investigator that a police officer stopped her for an expired
decal on her car. She then explained that she learned a warrant for her arrest had been
issued because the apartment representative had filed charges against Applicant for
Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in 2.b at the hearing. After Applicant testified, Department4
Counsel noted that he had misread the report of information concerning the interview with the investigator.
4
Assault and Battery in the incident described above (Tr. 113). She also discussed her
financial difficulties and the various debts she had incurred.4
In January 2007, Applicant considered purchasing a home. She completed a
loan application and again became aware of her outstanding financial difficulties and her
credit history. This was only a few months before she completed her March 2007
security clearance application.
When Applicant completed her March 12, 2007 application, she answered “no” to
section 23: Your Police Record (which asks about prior arrests) and “no” to section 28:
Your Financial Delinquencies. Applicant explained that she had forgotten the 2001
arrest again. She had no reasonable reason for not answering “yes” to the question in
section 28(a) and (b) concerning the debts more than 90 or 180 days overdue (GE 1).
She was evasive at the hearing and inconsistent with her answers on cross
examination. She did not list the delinquencies because she did not want them to be a
possible security concern. 
Applicant’s current employer recommends Applicant for a security clearance. He
reports she has excellent qualities and can be trusted. She is a dedicated worker. He is
aware of the security concerns facing Applicant, and believes she is resolving her
financial problems. Applicant’s recommendations include one from the acting pastor of
her church and one from a friend (AE A-C).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
5
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on numerous accounts and
judgments and did not meet her financial obligations from the late 1990's until the
present time. Her credit reports confirm that she has recent debts as well. The evidence
6
is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose in 1999. She accumulated some delinquent debt due to her
separation. While those circumstances may have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does
not end at that point. She has not acted responsibly. Her conduct over the last six
months with her creditors does not remove security concerns or doubts about her
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. She has 13 outstanding
delinquent debts. This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, her
financial problems initially arose from her separation, her illness and a period of
unemployment. Although, she did receive disability payments and unemployment
benefits, those benefits were adequate for her to maintain payments on her debts. After
she became re-employed, she did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving these
debts. I find this potentially mitigating condition partially applies. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received counseling. She had an
appointment in 2007 but did not keep the appointment. She paid some of debts and
judgments in 2003, the tax in 2005, and has a payment plan for two debts. In light of her
13 delinquent debts, her efforts are not sufficient to carry her burden in this case. I
conclude these potentially mitigating conditions do not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant originally stated that
she disputed the car repossession as her debt because she thought her husband would
make payments on it. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition partially applies.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
7
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of
special interest is any failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, when Applicant completed her 2002 security application, she did not
list any delinquent debts, garnished pay, repossessions, judgments, or her 2001 arrest
for assault and battery. In her 2007 security application, she listed a repossession and
garnishment but did not list any delinquent accounts. She answered “no” to all the
relevant questions, and did not disclose the debts discussed in the previous section.
Her explanations are not credible. She provided deliberately false information.
Moreover, just a few months before the 2007 application, when looking for a house,
Applicant was reminded of her financial problems when her credit was reviewed. Thus,
16(a) applies.
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security
concerns in this case. After considering them, none of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶
17 apply. Applicant’s falsification of her SF 86 in March 2007 is recent. She did not
promptly inform the government of her falsification. Her interview in 2004 was two years
after her 2002 application. She did not receive counseling to improve her conduct. No
one advised her to falsify her SF 86. She admitted that she had no reason not to answer
the questions. The falsification of her SF 86 is substantiated. The falsification of her
2007 SF 86 cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.
.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 30:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 31(a), an “single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” may be potentially
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG 31(c) an allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted” may raise security concerns. As discussed above, Applicant intentionally
8
falsified her security clearance applications. This is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions.
While the falsifications in the 2002 are in the past, they have recurred as recently
as 2007. Thus, none of the mitigating conditions apply and they are not sufficient to
mitigate the disqualifying conduct. None of the mitigating conditions apply under this
guideline.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are insufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant has served in various positions with a
security clearance for a number of years. She has not had any documented problems
with her employment. Her current employer praises her hard work and professionalism.
However, Applicant has a long history of financial difficulties and has resolved less than
half of them.  Moreover, her recent falsification of her SF 86 in 2007 is a violation of
Federal law under Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, which is a felony. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations, personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
9
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Withdrawn
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
