 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14012
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the security concerns caused by his financial problems. 
On December 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by the DOHA on January 2, 2008. He
admitted all SOR allegations except the allegation contained in subparagraph 1.e, and
requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on January 25, 2008, and
was reassigned to me on February 8, 2008, to be heard in conjunction with other hearings
I had scheduled in the same city. A notice of hearing was issued on February 27, 2008,
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
scheduling the hearing for March 19, 2008. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. The
government submitted four documentary exhibits that were marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-4, and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified and
submitted 14 documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1-14,
and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on March 28,
2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 36 years old and has been employed as an engineer by defense
contractors since August 2005. He was awarded a bachelor of science degree in electrical
engineering in December 1994. He was employed as a team leader by a tobacco company
from March 1996 to July 2002, when he quit to start a telecommunications business with
his brother. That endeavor failed and Applicant closed the business in February 2005. He
was unemployed until April 2005, when he obtained employment as a car salesman, which
employment he maintained until being hired into his present position. He was granted an
interim security clearance in December 2005.
Applicant has been married since August 1995. He has one 16-year-old child, and
twins who are 12 years old. Applicant and his wife separated in either January or February
2002, and reunited in August 2004. They shared custody of their children during the
separation and Applicant also provided his wife and children with financial support.
Applicant and his family resided in a mobile home he is purchasing until they bought their
current house in 2006. Applicant’s mother now resides in the mobile home. He pays the
mortgage payment on that residence, and she pays the other expenses and assists with
the care of his children in return therefore. 
Applicant’s financial problems began when he attempted to start the
telecommunications business. A large part of that business was intended to furnish
services in countries located in the Middle East which proved unsuccessful following the
start of the coalition war in Iraq. Applicant’s annual income fell from approximately $70,000
in 2001 to about $25-30,000 in the years after he resigned from the tobacco company.
Although he had accumulated about $40,000 in savings before launching this business
enterprise and his wife was earning approximately $20,000 per year, he soon found it
necessary to pay a large portion of their living expenses by using credit cards in an effort
to make the business a success while maintaining the lifestyle they had established. 
The SOR alleges five collection accounts, totaling $23,436, one account that was
charged off as a bad debt, in the amount of $6,701, and delinquent federal taxes, in the
amount of $2,406.46. Applicant satisfied the charged off account, SOR subparagraph 1.b,
by paying an agreed upon settlement of $4,747.43, which represented 50% of the total
owed, including interest, attorney’s fees, and court costs. (AE 8 & 11). He entered into a
repayment agreement on the delinquent taxes, SOR subparagraph 1.g, and that debt is
now fully satisfied. (GE 2 & AE 9)
 Although the court file numbers listed in AE 6 and AE 10 are different, the creditor account number
2
contained in AE 10 (9943242), reflecting an overpayment on the account and a refund to the debtor, is
identical to the creditor account number contained in the credit report included as part of GE 2. Thus, whether
AE 6 is a receipt showing payment of the amount due on the account in accord with Applicant’s testimony or
not, AE 10 independently establishes the debt has been fully satisfied.  
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
3
Applicant has satisfied the collection accounts alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d
(owed in the amount of $1,757) (AE 7), and SOR subparagraph 1.e (owed in the amount
of $4,517) (AE 6 & 10).  Applicant obtained the funds to satisfy these collection accounts2
and the charged off account by borrowing funds from his 401k retirement plan. He is
repaying the loan from the 401k plan by having $79.76 automatically deducted from his
wages each payday. (AE 14)
Applicant has approximately $25,000 equity in his home. He attempted to obtain a
home equity loan to obtain the needed funds to satisfy his remaining delinquent creditors.
However, his loan application was denied because of the existence of those creditors. (AE
4 & 5) Shortly before the hearing, Applicant obtained counseling from a consumer credit
counseling service in an effort to obtain assistance from that company to satisfy his
remaining creditors. Because he did not include his wife’s income in the application, he
was about $350 per month short of the amount they required for him to obtain the
company’s assistance. He credibly testified he is going to reapply and include his wife’s
income which will make him eligible for the program.       
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations), with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this
case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id. at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
4
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG]) 18
Applicant incurred a number of delinquent debts when his attempt to start a
business with his brother failed. Those debts included delinquent taxes and accounts that
were either submitted for collection or charged off as bad debts. Disqualifying Conditions
(DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not
meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant accumulated reasonable savings and had his wife’s income to rely upon
when he decided to launch his business enterprise. Unfortunately for him, world events
conspired to make his entrepreneurial undertaking a failure. Mitigating Condition (MC)
20(a): the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
5
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances apply.
Applicant has now once again obtained secure employment and has taken
meaningful steps to satisfy his delinquent creditors. He has paid off four of the debts
alleged in the SOR, including the federal tax debt, and has applied for assistance through
a consumer credit counseling service to resolve the remaining debts. Although three
delinquent debts remain outstanding, Applicant’s actions in resolving the other debts and
his credible testimony as to what he will do to resolve those that remain permit application
of MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and MC
20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.  
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has mitigated the
financial considerations security concern. He has overcome the case against him and
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-g: For Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
