                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13203 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
1Item 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Nov. 29, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on December 29, 2007, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated January 17, 2008, was provided to him on 
January 30, 2008, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant’s response was due on 
March 2, 2008. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me 
on April 7, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR all of the SOR’s allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old accountant.5 In 1999 he received a bachelors degree 
and in May 2002 he received a Masters Degree in Professional Accountancy and a 
Masters Degree in Business Administration. He has no military service. He has never 
married. He was employed from 1995 to 2002 as a cheerleading instructor and coach 
and after 2002 he has been employed as an accountant.      
 
Drug Involvement (Guideline H) 
 
On his March 8, 2007, security clearance application, Applicant admitted using 
marijuana 25 times between March 1999 and March 8, 2007 (Item 6). He also admitted 
using ecstasy or MDMA an estimated 45 times from 1999 to 2005.  From March 1999 to 
May 2002 he used ecstasy once a month, and from May 2002 to July 2005 he used 
ecstasy once a year (Item 7 at 5-6). He used marijuana from March 1999 until June 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Jan. 22, 2008; 
however, Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated January 30, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
4 Item 3, Applicant’s SOR response, notarized Dec. 29, 2007, is the source for the facts in this 
section unless stated otherwise.  There are minor inconsistencies in Applicant’s descriptions of the 
frequency of his drug use.  Compare Item 3 and Item 7 at 5-6. 
  
5Item 4 (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated Mar. 8, 2007, will 
be referred to as a security clearance application in this decision) is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph, unless otherwise stated.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
2007 (Item 3, Item 7 at 3, 6). He stopped using marijuana in June 2007 because an 
investigator told him he had to stop using marijuana to be granted a clearance (Item 3, 
Item 7 at 6).   
 
Applicant purchased, sold and transported ecstasy with varying frequency from 
March 1999 until at least April 2003. He continues to associate with individuals who use 
marijuana in his presence (Item 3, Item 7 at 6).    
 
Personal Conduct (Guideline E) 
 
 In April 2006, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol 
(DUI) (Item 6 at 25-26, Item 3). On December 6, 2006, he was convicted of DUI and 
sentenced to 30 days in jail, with 30 days suspended, and ordered to attend alcohol 
awareness classes and Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. His driver’s license was 
suspended for one year, until approximately December 5, 2007.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
6 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Drug Involvement (Guideline H) 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug8 involvement: 
 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
7 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
8AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse”9 and “illegal drug possession, 
including . . .  purchase, sale or distribution [of illegal drugs]. . . .” AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). 
The other six disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. These two 
disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used and possessed marijuana and/or 
ecstasy from 1999 to June 2007. He used marijuana at least once after applying for a 
security clearance, but did not use marijuana after receiving a clearance.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation. AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana and ecstasy or 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine are Schedule I controlled 
substances. See Sch. I (c)(9) and I(c)(10), respectively.  See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 
2006) (ecstasy).    
 
9 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”  ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”10 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not fully apply because Applicant’s last illegal drug use was in 
June 2007, which is still sufficiently recent to remain a concern. His overall illegal drug 
use lasted approximately eight years, and involved numerous uses of marijuana, and 
ecstasy.11 Moreover, he did not provide any corroboration that his drug use ended.12 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing.  The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy.  For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an Administrative Judge stating: 
 
The Administrative Judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times 
a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the 
illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
11 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the Administrative Judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse.  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
letely restored.   
                                                                                                                                                                                          
His failure to present corroboration about his rehabilitation from medical and/or 
psychiatric personnel, co-workers, neighbors, family or friends is a factor in this 
decision.13 Based on all the facts and circumstances, he has not met his burden of 
establishing that his drug use will not recur. Because he may again use illegal drugs, his 
current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment is not comp
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. Although he has abstained from drug abuse since June 2007, 
he did not provide “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation.” Guideline ¶ 26(b) is not applicable.  
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because his abuse of marijuana and Ecstasy did not 
follow an illness, and these illegal drugs were never prescribed for him. AG ¶ 26(d) is 
not applicable because he has not completed a prescribed drug treatment program, and 
there has not been a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
I find For Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.d because the same marijuana use is alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d.  Drug use after completing a security clearance application is not a 
disqualifying condition. As such, SOR ¶ 1.d is an unwarranted duplication. I also find For 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.e because association with drug users is not a disqualifying 
condition.    
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in June 2007. Although the 
motivations to stop using drugs are evident,14 he did not disclose any internal motivation 
aside from wanting a security clearance to refrain from drug abuse. He has not shown or 
demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse.   
 
 
12 See whole person analysis, infra. See ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 2, 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 
2006) (indicating when a mitigating condition cannot be fully applied, “some credit” is still available under 
that same mitigating condition). 
 
13Administrative judges “must look at the record for corroboration of Applicant’s testimony.” ISCR 
Case 02-03186 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006). Moreover, a judge may consider “Applicant’s failure to 
present documentary evidence in corroboration of his denials and explanations.” ISCR Case 01-20579 at 
5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004) (holding Applicant’s failure to provide reasonably available corroborative 
evidence may be used in common-sense evaluation to determine whether Applicant’s claims are 
established). In ISCR Case 01-02677 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2002), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
While lack of corroboration can be a factor in evaluating the reliability or weight of 
evidence, lack of corroboration does not automatically render a piece of evidence 
suspect, unreliable, or incredible. . . . Evidence that lacks corroboration must be 
evaluated in terms of its intrinsic believability and in light of all the other evidence of 
record, including evidence that tends to support it as well as evidence that tends to 
detract from it.   
 
14Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free.  
  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Personal Conduct (Guideline E) 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
With respect to his possession and use of illegal drugs, and his DUI arrest, 
conviction, and sentence, including suspension of his driver’s license, AG ¶¶ 16(d)(1), 
16(d)(3), and 16(e)(1) are the three pertinent disqualifying conditions:  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior .  .  .; [and] (3) a pattern of .  .  . rule violations; [and] 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d)(1) and 16(d)(3) do not apply because his drug abuse and DUI are  
explicitly covered under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), G (Alcohol Consumption) and/or 
H (Drug Involvement). As such, the recapitulation of his drug offenses and DUI under 
Guideline E is unwarranted. 
 
Certainly possession and use of illegal drugs and DUI violates important civil and 
criminal rules in our society, and his lengthy history of involvement with illegal drugs is 
conduct a person might wish to conceal as it adversely affects a person’s professional 
and community standing. The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(e) applies with 
respect to his drug possession and use, as well as his DUI. Applicant’s supervisor and 
security officials are well aware of this misconduct. He has taken the positive step of 
disclosure, eliminating his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. I do not 
believe he would compromise national security to avoid public disclosure of this 
misconduct. The personal conduct security concerns, pertaining to his drug possession 
and use, as well as his DUI, are mitigated, and I find For Applicant on SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 
2.b.  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
AG ¶ 16(g) indicates “association with persons involved in criminal activity,” is a 
disqualifying condition.  Applicant admits he has continued his association with marijuana 
users, and therefore AG ¶ 16(g) applies to this conduct. None of the mitigating conditions 
under Guideline E apply to his continuing association with drug users. Accordingly, I find 
Against Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.c.  
 
Whole Person Concept15 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
Applicant has earned advanced degrees. He was employed from 1995 to 2002 
as a cheerleading instructor and coach, and after 2002 he has been employed as an 
accountant without evidence of any at work disciplinary problems.  There is no evidence 
of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. This shows some 
responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. 
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. He 
used marijuana 25 times between March 1999 and June 2007. He also used ecstasy an 
estimated 45 times from 1999 to 2005.  His marijuana use continued after he filled out 
his security clearance application, and did not end until an investigator told him his 
continued marijuana use would jeopardize his security clearance. He continues to 
associate with individuals who use marijuana in his presence. In April 2006, Applicant 
was arrested for DUI. On December 6, 2006, he was convicted and sentenced for the 
April 2006 DUI. His drug use and DUI were knowledgeable, voluntary, and not isolated. 
He is sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. Drug use and DUI are 
not prudent or responsible. He did not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have 
a clear understanding about how to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in 
15 Although I find For Applicant with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 2.a and 2.b in the decretal 
section of this decision, consideration of all established SOR conduct is required under the “whole 
person” concept.   
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
the misconduct. I have persistent and serious doubts about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
  Applicant’s misconduct calls into question his current ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug involvement and 
personal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”16 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
16See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
