 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01746 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that he has a track record of financial 
responsibility and that his financial problems are under control. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline F (financial considerations) security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 12, 
2012. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On September 14, 2015, the DOD Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F.1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 
2015, and elected to have his case decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 
30, 2015, was provided to him by transmittal letter that same day. Applicant received 
the FORM on January 5, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to respond to the FORM and 
submit any objections, corrections, and to provide material in extenuation and 
mitigation. Applicant did not respond to the FORM or submit any information. The case 
was assigned to me on March 24, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b, he 
wrote a note in his answer to the SOR indicating that he was making weekly payments 
of $50, but presented no documentary evidence to support his claim. Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old structural welder (shipbuilder) employed with a federal 
contractor. He graduated from high school in 1993. He married his first wife in 1998 and 
divorced in 2008. He married his present wife in 2010. Applicant has a 16-year-old son, 
and four stepchildren ages 14, 15, 15, and 22.  
 
Applicant’s employment record shows that he was employed between April 2002 
and December 2003, and between March 2005 and May 2012. Applicant was hired by 
his current employer, a federal contractor, in May 2012, and has been continuously 
employed to present. This is his first security clearance application. He provided no 
explanation about the employment gap reflected on his 2012 SCA employment record 
(between December 2003 and March 2005). 
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of Applicant’s September 2012 SCA asked him to 
disclose whether in the past seven years he had: failed to file or pay his federal and 
state taxes; any financial problems, including delinquent or in-collection debts; loan 
defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; and whether he 
was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. Applicant answered “yes” and 
disclosed that he had failed to file his 2009 federal income tax returns and to pay his 
taxes. He claimed that his work hours were reduced and he did not have the money to 
pay his taxes. He averred he paid his taxes in 2010. 
 
Applicant also disclosed seven delinquent accounts in collection from the period 
2008 through 2011, most of which were alleged in the SOR. Applicant explained in his 
2012 SCA that his financial problems were caused or aggravated by his wife losing her 
job and being unemployed during an unspecified period, her ex-husband not paying 
child support (alleged arrearages of $10,000), and his work hours being reduced during 
an unspecified period. He was the only breadwinner for the family, and his income alone 
was insufficient to pay their living expenses and accumulated debts, and he fell behind 
on paying his debts.  
 
 
3 
 
 
The subsequent security clearance background investigation revealed the 13 
delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, totaling over $34,000. The SOR allegations are 
established by Applicant’s admission and the two credit reports attached to the FORM.  
 
In his 2012 SCA and in his answer to the SOR (October 2015), Applicant claimed 
that he had paid two debts, and was trying to work out payment agreements with 
numerous creditors. Applicant presented little documentary evidence to support any of 
these claims. I note, however, that the FORM credit reports (submitted by the 
Government) show that Applicant paid 13 accounts not alleged in the SOR - one for 
less than originally owed, and he also paid a judgment that was released in April 2012.  
 
Applicant provided no information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
expenses and debts. There is no information to indicate whether he participated in 
financial counseling or whether he follows a budget. Applicant failed to present 
documentary evidence of debts paid, contacts with creditors, payment agreements 
made, or of any efforts to otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant has a history of unresolved financial problems that date back from 
2008 to present. He has 13 delinquent accounts totaling over $34,000 that have been 
outstanding since around 2008. His financial problems raise the applicability of the 
following financial considerations disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
 
5 
 
 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are ongoing, and he presented insufficient evidence to show his 
debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant claimed his wife lost her job for an unspecified period, that his work 
hours were reduced for an unspecified period, and that his wife was not receiving child 
support from her ex-husband. He averred that his financial problems resulted from 
these events. These periods of unemployment and underemployment could establish 
circumstances beyond his control that may have contributed or aggravated his financial 
problems. However, he presented little evidence to show how he acquired the debts, 
what efforts he took to remain in contact with his creditors, or what efforts he has taken 
to try to pay or resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems date back to 2008. He submitted his SCA in 2012, 
and indicated that he was trying to resolve his financial problems. He was issued the 
SOR in September 2015 and the FORM in December 2015. Based on the FORM credit 
reports, he paid or resolved some non-SOR debts. Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to 
submit sufficient documentary evidence to show his efforts to contact creditors, 
establish payment plans, or of any payments made to resolve the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. He failed to provide a reasonable explanation for his failure to 
address his delinquent debts after he was hired by his current employer and made 
aware of the Government’s security concerns about his financial problems. 
 
 In sum, Applicant did not submit sufficient evidence to show he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances to warrant applicability of AG ¶ 20(b). He presented insufficient 
evidence to show that he initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current living 
 
6 
 
 
expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in financial 
counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient to 
establish clear indications that he does not have a current financial problem, or that his 
financial problem is being resolved, or is under control. Applicant failed to establish that 
he has a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years working for a federal contractor. This is his 
first SCA. Nevertheless, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to show that he has a 
track record of financial responsibility. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
