1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-07483
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 5,
2006. On October 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline,
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 22, 2008 and
answered it on the same day. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge
through Counsel. I received the case assignment on April 2, 2009. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on April 15, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May
13, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted Exhibits (AE) A
2
through C, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May
26, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 18, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.b but denied 1.c of the SOR, with explanations. He also
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is 33 years old. He has never been married and has no children (Tr. 1).
He graduated from high school in 1994 and received his undergraduate degree in 2002.
He has never held a security clearance. He has been with his current employer for three
years (Tr. 17).
In June 2000, Applicant was charged with Trespass Voyeurism. He was walking
around aimlessly in a neighborhood. Someone reported a suspicious person and the
police were called. He was arrested for looking in bedroom windows. He admits that he
had previously done the same thing. He acknowledged at the time that it was a “stupid
thing to do.” He pled guilty to a misdemeanor for trespassing and paid a fine of $300.
The court ordered counseling (GE 2). 
Applicant consulted with a psychiatrist per a court order. He had been wrestling
with several issues and had already sought some counseling. He continued with the
same physician. He also sought ecclesiastical advice and counsel based on the
incident. He attended counseling for a period of three or four months on a bi-weekly
basis (Tr. 32). He did not receive a diagnosis from the counselor (GE 4).
In 2005, Applicant again visited a counselor on his own accord. He was
experiencing a stressful time with relationships and his life goals (GE 4). He
acknowledged that he was also dealing with some anger and frustration (Tr. 33). He
discussed his problems with his church counselors as well as his parents. He realized
that he needed some guidance in his personal life (Tr. 33) and was very open to
receiving help. He attended sessions for approximately three months.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in January 2006 (GE 1). His
supervisor sat at a computer and she read the questions to Applicant. He responded to
each question and she entered the data (Tr. 39). When she asked about Section 23
(concerning a police record), Applicant told her he had a trespassing conviction in 2000.
He elaborated that it was a Class C misdemeanor. His supervisor told Applicant that no
derogatory information was found during his background employment investigation. She
entered a “no” for that section. Applicant admitted that this made him uncomfortable. He
was expecting more questions concerning the facts of the incident. At the same time, he
believed he gave her the criminal disposition and she chose not to enter it into the
application (Tr. 20). Applicant stressed that she had a strong personality and he decided
3
not to make any more comments to her about the incident since she was the person in
charge of security issues. He acknowledges that he signed the application but did not
read the entire form (Tr. 46).
Applicant was credible in his explanation at the hearing that he was not familiar
with the security clearance process or the application. He relied on his supervisor’s
expertise in the matter. He concedes that if he had completed the application himself,
he would have entered the 2000 trespass conviction. At the hearing, he acknowledged
that it was his responsibility. However, he answered to the best of his ability and trusted
the expertise of his supervisor (Tr. 49).
Applicant completed his formal employment application on September 29, 2005.
The application asked for detailed information. He clearly answered a question
concerning any convictions to a felony or misdemeanor on the application with a “yes”
and wrote trespassing - September 2000 (AE B).
Applicant also completed an Application for Licensure (Unarmed Private Security
Officer) on December 6, 2005. He disclosed the 2000 conviction to the State for his
license. He attached the printout from the case to the Application Licensure (AE C).  
Applicant was extremely candid at the hearing. He explained that since this
incident with the security application, he has had trust issues with his employer. He
believed he had given sufficient information to his employer about the embarrassing
incident and did mention to the background investigator that he would prefer “not to
have anyone at [his] place of employment know that information”. However, Applicant
decided to provide them with the same information that he provided on his State
application. He presented copies of the police report and court documents to his
Operations Manager (AE A). 
At the hearing, Applicant was also extremely open about his one charge and
conviction for trespass in 2000. He answered all questions and was not evasive. He
explained his humiliation about the episode. Applicant has not had any further incidents
of any kind. He believes that he has learned important things about himself and has a
standard of integrity. He explained that he wanted the hearing to defend his honor and
commitment to his work.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
4
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
5
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicting that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information is another disqualifying
condition; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
professional, or community standing. 
Applicant’s 2006 security clearance application did not contain his 2000  arrest
and conviction for Trespass for Voyeurism. Applicant disclosed the conviction in his
employment application for “trespass” with no details about the specifics. When his
supervisor asked him to respond to Section 23 on the security clearance application, he
told her that he had a conviction for a misdemeanor trespass. She did not enter the
information. Applicant, although uncomfortable, relied on her judgment and expertise in
the security process and signed the application. He knew that he had disclosed the
information to her verbally and on his employment application. He was not familiar with
the security clearance process. Thus, AG ¶16(a) and 16(b) do not apply. 
In this case, Applicant was found guilty of Trespass Voyeurism in June 2000.  He
admits that he walked around a neighborhood on several occasions before this incident
and looked in bedroom windows. He was embarrassed about the incident and knows it
was a stupid thing to do. Thus, AG ¶16(c) (d), and(e) apply.
6
Under AG ¶ 17, the following conditions could mitigate the government’s security
concerns:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
I find that Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct concern in this case. He
completed court ordered counseling for the 2000 incident. This is the only conviction
Applicant on his record. He continued counseling in 2005 and has discussed the
incident with his parents and church advisors as well as his counselors. He has
disclosed the specific facts of the arrest and conviction with his employer. Applicant was
completely candid at his hearing. He accepted responsibility for his actions. In this case,
AG ¶ 17(c), (d), and (e) are applicable.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a hard-working, earnest
young man. He was very candid and open at the hearing. He acknowledged that he did
a very stupid thing and that he cannot change the past. He wants to move on. He likes
his position and wants to maintain his position.
7
Applicant relied on his supervisor’s expertise when completing the security
clearance application. He told her about a trespass conviction and also disclosed it on
an employment application and an application for a state license for a security guard
position. His license was granted and he has been working for the company for three
years. He had no intention to deliberately deceive the Government.
Applicant obtained counseling and has addressed personal issues. He advised
his church elders and his parents about the 2000 incident. He has given the complete
court document to his Operations Manager. He was credible at the hearing and also
very sincere in acknowledging his mistakes and accepting responsibility for his actions. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from personal
conduct.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted .
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
