1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06398
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) signed on April 5, 2006. On August 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns
arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In a response notarized on October 6, 2008, Applicant denied 9 of the 11
allegations noted in the SOR and declined a hearing on the record. Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Materials (FORM), including 14 attached items,
dated February 19, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on March 9, 2009. She timely
submitted additional materials in response to the FORM. On May 15, 2009, the
Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge for
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR (SOR allegation 1.i).      1
 Appellant states she filed the bankruptcy because she “had a ‘housefire’ and was trying desperately to      2
save my house from foreclosure.” Response to FORM. There is no indication whether this “housefire” was
a genuine conflagration or is a term meant to describe her financial situation. (SOR allegation 1.h).
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.      3
 Id.      4
 These years are the subject of SOR allegation 1.j. The facts are unclear, but it appears Federal income      5
tax returns for 1982-1984 were filed at that time as well. (SOR allegation 1.k).
2
administrative determination. I was assigned the case on May 18, 2009. Based upon a
review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her
burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for
the same company for over 31 years. She presently serves as an engineering data
systems specialist. She earned a high school diploma and completed three years of
college. She is married with three grown children.
In 1994, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection because she “had a
very ‘lazy’ husband and in an effort to try to keep [her] house from being foreclosed on.
. . . [She] eventually separated from [her] husband and had to leave the house
anyway.”  Her case was dismissed in or about September 1995. She again filed for1
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in June 1999 in order to protect her house, but did
not include any bills or other obligations in her filing.  That case was dismissed in or2
about June 1999. In the late 1990s, Appellant failed to file her federal taxes because
she did not have the funds to pay her taxes-owed. She was unaware she could file,
then pay the amount owed later. She also felt that, after failing to file initially: “I guess
I’d better not file this time because ‘I ALREADY OWE THEM.’”  She ultimately married3
“a young man that was ‘God’ sent” who helped her get her life back on track.  When4
she eventually ran into trouble with her federal taxes, he helped her sort out the
problem. Meanwhile, her health began to decline. She suffered from extreme
hypertension by the end of the 1990s. Six years later, she was diagnosed with diabetes.
A thyroid condition followed that diagnosis. Doctors had difficulty adjusting her
medications. With her husband’s assistance, she ultimately filed federal income tax
returns for the years 1996, 1997, 1998, 2002, and 2003 together.  5
Ultimately, a tax lien was put in place for around $7,8883. Applicant states,
without documentary evidence, that she took a loan to satisfy the lien. She is currently
indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for approximately $12,500. It is being
 As evidence of this plan, Applicant submitted a single month’s “Monthly Statement” from the IRS,      6
indicating her “next payment of $340,” was due on February 28, 2009. This amount was due on a then-current
balance of approximately $8,000 (including approximately $3,700 in interest). The statement reflects no prior
history of payments toward her obligation for tax years 1997, 1998, and 2001. See Applicant’s Response to
the FORM.
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.      7
 As depicted in SOR allegations 1.a, 1.j, and 1.k. The remaining two allegations (1.h and 1.i) concern      8
bankruptcy petitions which, by themselves, are legal and legitimate methods for resolving financial problems
and do not necessarily raise significant security concerns. Here, Applicant sought bankruptcy protection not
to satisfy extraneous debts, but to protect her home. 
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.      9
3
repaid through a payment plan under which she pays $350 a month.  After making6
payments on this debt for a certain amount of time, Applicant claims the IRS will drop
the 1996 and 1997 tax liabilities, lowering the total amount owed to about $5,000 or
less.  Much of the sum now owed is derived from penalties and interest. Otherwise,7
Applicant has been current on her federal taxes for the past decade.
The SOR also cites to nine negative entries on Applicant’s credit report.
Applicant initially denied all allegations in her first answer to the SOR. Some of those
answers were amended in her response to the FORM. The six delinquent accounts at
issue unrelated to her tax situation  are: 8
MEDICAL PROVIDER ($46) – No proof of payment. Regarding SOR allegation 1.b,
Applicant stated she is not indebted to this creditor because “the amount was paid off at
or on 2007. In fact, that amount was turned over to a collector before my insurance
actually paid that amount back to the doctor.”  In her response to the FORM, Applicant9
stated she had a receipt showing the bill was paid. What was submitted, however, was
a form sent to her from the medical office regarding a request to delete its account from
her credit report. The form includes a section indicating the amount due ($25.00) and a
section to be remitted with payment. No evidence of payment by Applicant or any other
party is included, nor is evidence that the account is now at zero and in good standing. 
MEDICAL PROVIDER ($25) – No proof of payment. Regarding SOR allegation 1.c,
Applicant stated she paid this amount in 2007. In her response to the FORM, Applicant
stated she had a receipt showing the bill was paid. What she submitted, however, was
a form sent to her from the medical office regarding a request to delete its account from
her credit report. The form includes a section indicating the amount due ($46.00) and a
section to be remitted with payment. No evidence of actual payment by Applicant or any
evidence that the account is now at zero and in good standing is included. 
COLLECTIONS ($157) – No proof of payment. Regarding SOR allegation 1.d,
Applicant stated in her response to the SOR that she paid this balance “in April/May
 Id.      10
 Item 6 (Jun. 18, 2008, credit report), at 2, indicating $466 past due.      11
 May 7, 2009, Letter in response to the FORM.      12
4
timeframe (sic) 2007.”  She failed, however, to submit any evidence of payment or that10
the account is now at zero and in good standing.
COLLECTIONS ($575) – No proof of payment or repayment plan/debt consolidation.
Regarding allegation 1.e, Applicant initially denied this allegation and stated that she
had negotiated a settlement with this entity to pay off the balance by October 31, 2008.
In her response to the FORM, Applicant agreed to the allegation, stating that the bill
“has been incorporated into the bills for the debt consolidation company.” There is no
evidence, however, of an arrangement with a debt consolidation company or other
evidence concerning this outstanding account. 
CREDITOR ($466) – No proof of payment or deletion from credit report. Regarding
allegation 1.f, Applicant initially stated the proper balance owed was $361, an amount
she claimed was paid on October 2, 2008. In her response ot the FORM, Applicant
wrote: “This debt is showing as paid off as of October 2008. I personally spoke to this
collection agency and it was quoted to me (by them) that their bill was paid off last year
and I owe them nothing.” No documentary evidence was introduced, however,
substantiating this assertion or otherwise showing the account now reflects a zero
balance in good standing. Further, Applicant failed to provide any documentary
evidence as to how this account was reflected on her credit report on or after October
2008 in order to refute its representation on her June 18, 2008, credit report, included in
the FORM at item 6.11
COLLECTIONS/TELECOMMUNICATIONS ($1,581) – No proof of payment or other
arrangement to settle obligation. Regarding allegation 1.g, Applicant initially denied this
allegation, indicating she had an arrangement to settle her obligation by payment of
$700 by November 14, 2008. In her response to the FORM, however, she agreed to the
allegation, stating “[t]his bill is not showing up on my credit report. However, I know that
I owed a balance when this account was closed.”
Recently, in 2007, Applicant fractured her arm after falling off a van at work. This
caused her to miss “a lot of work” while she sought treatment for her condition.  Later,12
after receiving the SOR, Applicant reviewed her credit report. Looking forward to her
retirement, she saw this as an opportunity to clear up her credit. She states she has
contacted a “debt solution” company to help her resolve her financial issues and a “tax
consultant” for advice on her tax situation, but provided no evidence of her efforts with
such professionals. Moreover, there is no evidence establishing she has received
financial counseling. As of the date of her response to the FORM, Applicant was
“checking . . . to make sure that the debt solution company is legitimate and making a
 Id.      13
 Id.      14
 Id.      15
5
decision to go with one of these company’s [sic] to get my debt cleared up completely
and finally.”13
Applicant is devoted to her work and has enjoyed her nearly 32 years of service
with the company. She has maintained a security clearance previously without incident.
She leads a simple life with few unnecessary extras. She states that “the debt that [she
has] is no worse than the debt that a lot of people incur in the course of a lifetime that
have on-going health issues. I am an hourly employee with very limited ‘sick leave’ time
and after that I am not paid at all for time off from work.”  She believes she will be14
“good to go” by the end of 2009 with regard to getting her debt resolved.15
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial
and common sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative
Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      16
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      17
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      18
 Id.      19
 Id.      20
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.      21
6
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a16
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  17 18
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access19
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily20
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  Nor does it reflect badly on that21
person’s character. It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
\
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.      22
7
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.22
The Directive sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline. 
Here, Applicant has six delinquent accounts which remain substantially
unaddressed after the issuance of the SOR and LOR. She also incurred a liability for
failure to timely file her federal taxes for several years. Such facts are sufficient to give
rise to Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting
financial obligations”) apply. With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to Applicant
to overcome the case against her and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant incurred tax liability when she failed to file her federal tax returns for a
number of years. A couple of those years occurred when she was the sole familial
income generator, seeking separation and divorce from a first husband who contributed
little to the family coffers. During this time frame, she also instituted bankruptcy
proceedings designed not to relieve Applicant of various debts, but to protect her
homestead. Further, she has a history of hypertension and diabetes, and she most
recently fractured an arm on the job. At least two of the six unaddressed delinquent
accounts are medical in nature. To the limited extent these factors contributed to her
acquisition of her delinquent debt, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances”) applies. 
Otherwise, Applicant’s efforts toward resolving her delinquent debt are lacking
with regard to substantiating evidence. She initially claimed at least two of her
delinquent accounts for $575 and $1,581 would be resolved in 2008, then later
acknowledged they remained outstanding. She claimed an obligation for $466 was
satisfied in 2008 and so reflected on her credit report, but failed to submit a copy of the
pertinent section of that more recent credit report to substantiate her claim. Likewise, no
evidence was submitted to show a debt of $157 was previously satisfied. The evidence
submitted regarding her medical bills indicates that a dispute action was taken to
remove their entry from her credit report, but those same statements include stubs to
be submitted with payments for the amounts alleged. Consequently, there is no
evidence of actual payment. 
8
Finally, with regard to her tax situation, Applicant’s written explanation as to her
current repayment status is highly credible. Her explanation reflects the terminology and
nuance related to the repayment of past tax liabilities through a repayment plan.
Moreover, she has submitted one monthly statement reminding her of her next due
payment of $340. However, there is no documentation indicating that she is in timely
repayment on what appears to be a debt of approximately $8,000, how many other
payments have been made, or how she is progressing on her overall obligation. As for
her nearly $8,000 tax lien, which she claims she satisfied by borrowing money from
another source, there is no evidence of its satisfaction. Nor is there evidence of either
her progress on, or the satisfaction of, the obligation created by that loan. Choosing a
decision on the record precludes further inquiry into these matters and the ability to
extend additional time for the acquisition of additional documentation. As the record
currently reflects, the delinquent debts at issue remain largely unaddressed to date.
Consequently, FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”)
cannot apply. Moreover, based on the very limited facts presented and in the absence
of additional facts (e.g., whether Applicant pursued financial counseling) none of the
other available mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant is a mature woman who has devoted over three decades to her
employer, enjoys the challenges of her employment, and has never been involved in an
9
adverse security incident. Neither her abilities, qualifications, nor her dedication are at
issue.
Applicant’s first husband abdicated the role of head of the financial household to
her. She struggled to make ends meet and keep their mortgage timely. To that end, she
sought bankruptcy protection to save their home, but that action was later dismissed.
Her second husband has helped her with her finances, but that help has not
compensated for a lack of financial counseling and assistance. Despite her express
intentions, debts she hoped to satisfy in 2008 remain outstanding or lack appropriate
documentation of payment. Documents submitted to demonstrate payment of a debt or
progress on a repayment plan are insufficient as forms of evidence. While there is no
basis to doubt Applicant’s honesty or sincerity, her proffers do not substantiate her
claims of progress on her debts. In light of the fact the ultimate burden is on Applicant,
financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. Consequently, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
