                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12438
SSN: ----------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 27. 2008, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on February 2, 2009, and did not respond with any information.  The
case was assigned to me on April 8, 2009.   Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated several delinquent
debts between 2006 and 2008. They comprise a utility debt of $612.00 and several
student loans exceeding  $25,000.00 in the aggregate.
2
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to (a) have sold alcohol to a minor
working in a convenience store in November 1998, for which he was fined $350.00, and
(b) used the drug ecstasy on about three or four occasions during the period of 2003-
2004. 
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations.  He
claimed he was not aware of the utility debt before it was brought to his attention during
the course of his security clearance investigation.  He claimed that his short term jobs
did not produce enough revenue to enable him to pay off his student loans, as he had
hoped.  He claimed that his alcohol-related conviction was an isolated incident nearly 10
years ago that has not been repeated.  And he claimed that his use of ecstasy was very
limited (three to four times during the September 2003 and September 2004 time
period, and has not been repeated.  He claimed he has not pursued illegal drugs since
September 2004. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old technical writer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Records document that Applicant is unmarried and has no children (see ex. 4).
He has no military service of record (ex. 4).  He attended college between 1994 and
1998 and was awarded a bachelors degree in mass communications in August 1998
(see ex. 4).
Applicant accumulated a delinquent utility debt with creditor 1.a and several
delinquent student loan debts with creditor 1.b between 2006 and 2008.  His credit
report indicates he took out his student loans in 1995 and 1997, respectively, and
defaulted on them in June 2006 (see ex. 6).  He attributes (a) his utility debt (creditor
1.a) to his mistaken belief that the debt was already discharged and (b) his student loan
deficiencies to his lack of good paying jobs (see exs. 3 and 5). 
Applicant indicated in the interrogatory responses he furnished in October 2007
that he had not contacted his creditors to resolve his debts.  And he conditioned any
good faith repayment efforts to repay his student loans on his obtaining a security
clearance (see exs. 3 and 5).  
To date, Applicant has provided no documentation of any efforts to pay or
otherwise resolve his listed debts.  In the personal financial statement he furnished, he
lists net income of $1,778.00, total expenses of $1,430.00, and a net remainder of
$348.00 (ex. 5).  
In 1998, Applicant (age 22 at the time) was charged and convicted of selling
alcohol to a minor while working in a convenience store.  In this instance, he failed to
check the ID of the minor seeking to purchase alcohol (ex. 3).   He was fined $350.00
by the court.
3
In 2003-2004, Applicant used ecstasy on about three to four occasions.  He
assures he has not pursued any further drug use, and has no intention to do so.  He
states that he has since followed all laws and regulations related to drug use (ex. 3).
Applicant’s evidence is not controverted by any other evidence in the record, and is
accepted.  
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations in his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proofs of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG, ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  See AG, ¶ 15.
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a common sense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the judge may
draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the
evidence of record.  Conversely, the  judge cannot draw factual inferences that are
grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose
of establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation,
extenuation or mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is an employee of a defense contractor who accumulated a number
of delinquent debts (mostly student loans) during periods of underemployment. All of
his listed debts remain unresolved at this time.  Besides his delinquent debts,
Applicant was involved a prior alcohol-related offense in 1998, and used illegal drugs
on several occasions in the 2003-2004 time frame.  
Applicant’s finances
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the
person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address
these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines DC ¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a history
of not meeting financial obligations.”
5
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his holding low paying jobs following
his college graduation in August 1998.  All but one of his listed delinquent debts
involve delinquent student loans.  To date, he has not manifested any efforts to
address these debts, and conditions any future payments on the debts to his obtaining
a security clearance. 
Without any documented payment history or plan to resolve his listed debts,
Applicant cannot be credited with any manifest progress to date in regaining control of
his finances and provides no hard assurances of any commitment to resolve his debts
in the foreseeable future.  Applicant’s finances still require a good deal of effort on his
part to fully stabilize them. 
Based on his evidentiary showing, extenuating circumstances are associated
with Applicant’s inability to take care of his past debts.  Available to Applicant is MC  ¶
20(b) of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibility.”  Also, some judgment problems
persist over the delinquencies he has failed to cure with respect to his student loans,
and the conditions he places on addressing them. 
Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed
in this administrative record.  Not only are his listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but
he has failed to address them in any tangible way.  
                                                    
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases (as here).
Whole person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts (especially those associated
with his student loans).   Since graduating from college in 1998, he has not shown any
manifest effort in addressing any of his covered debts to mitigate his still delinquent
debts, and credit him with restored control over his finances.  In balance, whole
person assessment does not enable Applicant to establish judgment and trust levels
sufficient to enable him to overcome appraised security concerns arising out his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the extenuating facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, the limited resources he has had to address them
with, the absence of any corrective actions to address his old debts, it is still soon to
make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to repay his debts and
restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with his holding a security
clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered
by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b. 
6
Applicant’s alcohol and drug abuse history
Applicant’s alcohol and drug involvement is very limited. Still, it is sufficient
(considered together) to raise some independent security concerns. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, one of the disqualifying conditions
of the AGs for personal conduct is applicable: DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty
or rule violations. Afforded an opportunity to respond to the FORM materials, Applicant
did not reply. 
Judgment concerns exist over Applicant’s past alcohol-related conviction and
ensuing use of illegal drugs. These actions reflect judgment lapses and disregard of
local laws and regulations governing substance abuse. Applicant’s actions are
expressly covered by Guideline E, and are entitled to independent cognizance under
this Guideline according to the Appeal Board.  See ISCR Case No. 06-20964, at 6
(April 10, 2008).  Where (as here) there is additional probative adverse information
covered by Guideline E that is not expressly covered by Guidelines G and  H, and
which reflects a recurring pattern of questionable judgment, irresponsibility or
emotionally unstable behavior, independent grounds do exist for considering
questionable judgment and trustworthiness allegations under Guideline E.  Authority
for considering overlapping conduct covered by multiple guidelines is contained in the
guidance provided in Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(d) of the Directive’s August 2006 amendments. 
So, under Guideline E, core judgment and trustworthiness concerns covered by
D.C. ¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information,” is applicable in this
case.
Applicant may take advantage of one of the mitigating conditions under the
personal conduct guideline.  MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is fully applicable. Here again,
Applicant’s involvement with alcohol-related offenses and illegal drugs is limited to the
one alcohol-related offense in 1998 and the few scattered incidents of illegal drug use
in 2003-2004.  None of the covered conduct has been since repeated, and is unlikely
to be repeated in the future based on the evidence of record. 
From a whole person perspective, Applicant has not established enough
independent probative evidence in the administrative record to warrant positive
assessments  under the whole person concept in the Directive.  He has provided no
endorsements from supervisors and coworkers with his employer to soften or mitigate
any of the drug and judgment concerns associated with his past drug use.
7
Still, our Appeal Board has cautioned against drawing adverse inferences and
conclusions based on past actions and the absence of any corroborating proof of
suspension of alcohol-related offenses and drug use.   See ISCR Case No. 01-26893
(October 2002); ISCR Case No. 97-0356 (April1998). The Appeal Board has
consistently held that an unfavorable credibility determination concerning an applicant
is not a substitute for record evidence that the applicant used marijuana since his last
recorded use, or based on his past use is likely to resume usage in the future.  See
ISCR Case No. 02-08032 (May 2004). 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
judgment lapses stemming from his one alcohol-related offense in 1998 and limited
drug use in the limited time period of 2003-2004, Applicant mitigates security concerns
related to his personal conduct issues.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to
the allegations covered by Guideline E.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCES):         AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Sub-paras. 1.a and 1.b: Against t Applicant
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         FOR APPLICANT    
Sub-paras.2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
