                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15823
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
May 27, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on March 27, 2006.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On November 7, 2008, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 7, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on January 22, 2009.  A notice of hearing was originally issued on
February 5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for February 27, 2009.  The matter was
continued based upon a scheduling conflict.  An amended notice of hearing was issued
on February 23, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 3, 2009.  Applicant requested a
second continuance based upon good cause that was granted.  An amended notice of
hearing was issued on February 26, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 10, 2009.
Due to difficulties with the court reporting contract, per agency instruction, the hearing
was continued.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 11, 2009, scheduling the
2
hearing for April 10, 2009.  Applicant requested a continuance based upon good cause
that was granted.  Based upon Applicant’s medical reasons, another continuance was
granted.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 9, 2009, scheduling the hearing for
May 5, 2009.  At the hearing, the Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant
offered no exhibits, but testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until
close of business on May 19, 2009, to allow the Applicant to submit  documentation on
his behalf.  Applicant failed to submit any additional documentation.  The transcript of
the hearing (Tr.) was received on May 14, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 35 years old and has an Advanced Technical Certificate in
Computer Technology.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an Engineer
Technician IV and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admits fifty-four of the fifty-five debts set forth in the SOR under
this guideline.  These debts were incurred between 1996 and the present, and total
approximately $20,000.00.  Each of the debts are reflected in the Applicant’s Credit
Reports dated January 31, 2008, January 13, 2009 and May 4, 2009.  (Government
Exhibits 5, 6 and 7).  Even the smaller debts remain owing.  Applicant testified that he
has recently tried to re-establish himself with his creditors by trying to pay them what he
could afford.  (Tr. p. 33).  He contends that all of these debts were incurred as a result
of financial hardship and not extravagant spending.  (Tr. p. 39).    
The Applicant explained that he and his wife had their first child in 1997, at a very
young age.  They were young, naive and did not handle their money correctly.  (Tr. p.
27).  His first child, a son, was born with a disability, known as “Asperger’s Austism”.
This condition caused them to incur medical debt that they did not expect.  Medi-cal
only covers between 60 to 80 percent of his son’s medical expenses.  (Tr. p. 70).  The
Applicant is responsible for the rest.  
In 1998, while the Applicant was working a menial job, he injured his back on the
job.  This caused more unexpected medical bills.  In December 1999, he was placed on
3
workers compensation for three years due to his injury.  (Tr. p. 30).  The injury to his
lower spine ultimately required that he have a back fusion.  It was financially difficult to
support his family, but they managed.  
In December 3, 2002, the Applicant was allowed to go back to work.  By this
time, he and his wife had three children.  They continued to struggle financially.  In
2005, the Applicant began working for his current employer.  Since then, he has not
been able address his delinquent debts.  
Two years ago, the Applicant underwent extensive medical testing for cancer and
HIV, and it was determined that he had a serious infection in his lymph nodes.  This
caused him to be hospitalized and lose 67 pounds in a matter of six weeks.  (Tr. p. 37).
He incurred more unexpected medical bills and caused him to fall deeper in debt.        
Recently, the Applicant’s wife underwent a hysterectomy.  This caused more
unexpected medical bills.  Despite this, the Applicant recently took out a loan against his
401(k), known as a “hardship loan” in the amount of $7,084.00, in order to address
some of his delinquent debts.  (Tr. p. 38).  He has been diligently contacting each of his
creditors and setting up payment plans within his budget to pay his debt.     
Applicant testified that he would never do anything to jeopardize the
Government, his country, his job, or the national security.  (Tr. p. 45).
Due to his son’s medical condition, his wife does not work outside of the home.
Applicant now earns approximately $51,000.00 annually.  (Tr. p. 33).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
4
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation; 
19.(e) consistent spending beyond ones means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio,
and/or other financial analysis. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
5
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.  It is recognized and I sympathize with the Applicant’s history of
continual medical problems in the family that have been the main cause of his financial
problems.  Particularly, unexpected medical bills brought on by his son’s Asperger
Autism, his three year period on disability with his back, his lymph node infection and
his wive’s recent hysterectomy, have all been contributing factors to his financial
demise.  Not to mention the fact that, prior to his current employment, he worked menial
jobs that did not pay well.  Since 2005, he states that he has demonstrated outstanding
work performance on the job.  He also states that he has been promoted and given a
wage increase on a consistent basis.  In order to resolve his past due indebtedness, he
states that he has recently taken out a hardship loan against his 401(k) and is hoping to
6
pay some of his delinquent debt.  At the present time, however, he has failed to present
any documentary evidence to support his testimony. He has failed to demonstrate that
he has been able to address any of his delinquent debts.  Furthermore, the Applicant
was given the opportunity to provide some documentary evidence, such as medical
records for those effected family members, letters of recommendation from supervisors
and coworkers and performance evaluations, to name a few.  The record remained
open after the hearing for two weeks for receipt of such documentation.  The Applicant
failed to submit any documentation.  Under the circumstances, he has not made a good
faith effort to resolve his indebtedness, and there is insufficient evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  The Applicant has not demonstrated that he can properly handle his
financial affairs.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation apply.  However, Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances applies but is not
sufficient to mitigate the extent of his indebtedness.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, and it does not sufficiently
mitigate the adverse information brought against him.  On balance, it is concluded that
the Applicant has not overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a
security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant
as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
7
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against  the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.l.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.m.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.n.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.o.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.p.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.q.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.r.: Against  the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.s.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.t.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.u.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.v.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.w.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.x.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.y.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.z.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.aa.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.bb.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.cc.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.dd.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.ee.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.ff.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.gg.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.hh.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.ii.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.jj.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.kk.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.ll.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.mm.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.nn.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.oo.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.pp: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.qq:    For the Applicant.    
    Subpara.  1.rr.: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.ss.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.tt.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.uu.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.vv.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.ww.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.xx.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.yy.: Against the Applicant.
8
    Subpara.  1.zz.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.aa.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.bb.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.cc.: Against the Applicant.
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
