KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline E; Guideline M; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns in his case.  Any errors in the Judge’s
decision were harmless.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge was impartial. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-10485
DATE: 05/21/2009
DATE: May 21, 2009
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-10485
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 13, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), Guideline E
(Personal Conduct), Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems), and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.  On March 10, 2009, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Rita C. O’Brien denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to give sufficient
weight to his evidence of mitigation; whether the Judge erred in mischaracterizing Applicant’s
viewing of pornography in 2008 as child pornography rather than adult pornography; and whether
that characterization influenced the Judge’s reasoning and prevented her from reaching a fair and
impartial decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is 38 years old and has
held a security clearance since 1990.  When Applicant was 14, he inappropriately touched a 6-year-
old girl he was babysitting.  He was not prosecuted.  Thereafter, while babysitting, Applicant had
inappropriate sexual thoughts while changing the diaper of a 6-month-old girl, but did not act on
them.  Applicant viewed pornographic videotapes while in college.  At the same time, Applicant
discovered child pornography, which gave him “more of a high.”  The child pornography Applicant
accessed twice during college was textual rather than pictorial.  Between 1998 and 2004, Applicant
used his work computer to view child pornography approximately twelve times.  Between 1996 and
2005, Applicant used his work computer to view adult pornography approximately twice per month.
Applicant knew that viewing child pornography was illegal.  While he was not aware of the exact
language of his employer’s policy on personal use of company computers to view pornography, he
was aware that such use was “not in accord with how [company] wishes to do business.”  Decision
at 3, citing transcript at 67-69.  Applicant viewed pornography at work in an area where someone
might discover that he was doing it, and he “enjoyed the thrill of engaging in forbidden behavior.”
Decision at 3.  
Applicant underwent a polygraph examination at a government agency in January 2005.
Applicant stated that the examination forced him to confront his pornography habit.  A few days
later, Applicant purchased content-monitoring software that blocks access to pornography sites and
installed it on his work computer.  He purchased a later version in 2008 because the earlier version
interfered with his work.  Applicant can disable or remove the software at any time.  In 2008,
approximately six months before the hearing, Applicant disabled the software and accessed adult
pornography at work.  
After the polygraph examination, Applicant told his wife about his viewing of pornography.
In 2006 and 2007, Applicant met with his pastor for counseling.  Only Applicant’s wife and pastor
are aware of his habit.  Others know that his access to classified materials was limited after the
polygraph examination, but they do not know why.  Applicant admitted all the allegations in the
SOR except for a portion of one allegation under Guideline D.
In his appeal, Applicant argues that the Judge did not give adequate weight to his mitigating
evidence.  The Judge referred to Applicant’s testimony and discussed the possible application of
mitigating conditions in Applicant’s case.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has
to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (May 23, 2008).  With one
Applicant admits viewing child and adult pornography on his work computer over a period of time.   Applicant1
distinguishes between child pornography and adult pornography in part because the viewing of child pornography
violates federal law, while the viewing of adult pornography does not.  However, for at least part of the time, Applicant
was aware that the viewing of any pornography on his work computer was a violation of his employer’s policy.   
exception to be discussed below, the record in this case supports the Judge’s conclusions.
Applicant identifies an error by the Judge.  When discussing her conclusions under Guideline
J, the Judge incorrectly stated that Applicant had viewed child pornography at work six months
before the hearing, when in fact Applicant testified that he had viewed adult pornography at that
time.  Elsewhere in her decision, the Judge identified the pornography viewed at that time as adult
pornography.  The error by itself is harmless.  The Judge was unlikely to reach a different decision
in the absence of that error, since Applicant admitted to allegations under four guidelines and the
Judge found against Applicant under all four.1
Applicant contends that the Judge considered all pornography, not just child pornography,
to be illegal and therefore was unable to reach an impartial decision in his case.  This is analogous
to a claim of bias.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased.  A party
seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
02-08032 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).  The Board has noted that the issue is not whether Applicant
believes the Judge was biased or prejudiced against Applicant.  Rather the issue is whether the record
contains any indication that the Judge acted in a manner that would lead a reasonable person to
question the fairness or impartiality of the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-02253 at 3 (App. Bd.
Mar. 28, 2008).  In this case after a review of the Judge’s decision and the entirety of the record, the
Board concludes that Applicant has failed to meet his burden of demonstrating bias on the part of
the Judge.   
After reviewing the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).   “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision  is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a  security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
