 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10378 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant rebutted and mitigated the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline K, Handling Protected Information, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Her eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on March 22, 2007. On October 9, 2008, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline K, Handling Protected 
Information, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On December 29, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
February 26, 2009. I convened a hearing on April 1, 2009 to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced three exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 3 and admitted to the record without objection.  The Government 
provided the following provisions from the National Industrial Security Program 
Operating Manual (NISPOM) for administrative notice: Chapter 5, Section 1 and Section 
3 (January 1995); Chapter 5, Section 1 and Section 3 (February 28, 2006). The 
Government’s administrative notice documents were marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
 Applicant testified on her own behalf and called three witnesses. She introduced 
12 exhibits, which were identified and marked as Ex. A through Ex. L. Ex. A was 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel objected to the admission of a 
paragraph in Ex. B that appeared at the bottom of page one and the top of page two of 
the exhibit. I sustained the objection and agreed not to give the paragraph weight in my 
consideration of the evidence. The remainder of Ex. B was admitted without objection. 
Ex. C and D were admitted without objection. Department Counsel objected to a 
sentence in Ex. E as speculative. Applicant withdrew the sentence from Ex. E, and the 
exhibit was then admitted without objection. Ex. F through Ex. L were then admitted 
without objection. Applicant provided two documents for administrative notice, which 
were marked as HE 2 and HE 3.   
 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on April 10, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG K, Handling 
Protected Information, and one allegation under AG E, Personal Conduct. Applicant 
denied all allegations in the SOR. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old, married, and the mother of two young children. From 
1992 to 1996, she served on active duty in the United States Navy and held a security 
clearance. In 2000, she earned an Associate of Arts degree in computer information 
systems. She is employed by a government contractor.  As a government contract 
employee, she has held a security clearance and has been trained in the protection of 
classified  information. (Ex. 1; Tr. 120-122, 161-162.)  
   
 The SOR alleges four incidents in which Applicant deliberately or negligently 
failed to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other protected 
information. The first incident occurred in May 2002, when Applicant was employed as a 
supervisor in a government contractor’s asset management program. Her job required 
that she maintain an inventory of all classified computers used by the contractor, and 
she was responsible, as a supervisor, for certifying that any classified hard drives were 
 
3 
 
 
removed from computers before they were assigned to surplus or released to 
individuals or groups outside of the organization. (SOR ¶ 1.a.; Tr. 123-124.) 
 
 In May 2002, an employee sought to acquire computers that the contractor was 
no longer using for donation to a youth group. The employee’s request generated a 
procedure and the completion of a form certifying that the computers to be released had 
been stripped of their classified hard drives and contained no classified information.  (Tr. 
125-126.)  
 
 It was Applicant’s job to ensure that the process was carried out according to 
established rules and procedures for protecting classified information. The process 
required four signatures for release of the computers when an individual or group 
requested them. First, Applicant took a form with the request to an official in her 
department.  If the official approved the request, he signed the form. Applicant took the 
signed form back to her work area.  As the supervisor of her work unit, she was 
responsible for ensuring that all hard drives were removed from the computers to be 
transferred. Two signatures from Applicant’s work unit were required on the form.  
Applicant had the authority to do the work herself or to assign two subordinates to 
remove the hard drives from the computers. Whoever did the work, signed the form. 
After Applicant and her subordinates completed their tasks, an individual from security 
physically inspected all computers that were to be transferred to verify that they had 
been declassified and were cleared for transfer. If he found the computers were 
properly declassified, he then signed the form.  (Tr. 126-127.) 
 
 The day the alleged security violation took place was a Friday afternoon in May 
2002. Applicant took the form to the office of the department official to obtain his 
concurrence and signature. She assigned a subordinate to remove the hard drives from 
the computers. Each computer had two hard drives. When the subordinate had 
removed all of the hard drives, he signed the form to certify that the computers had 
been declassified. Without physically inspecting the computers to verify that the hard 
drives had all been removed, Applicant signed the form to verify that the computers had 
been declassified. This was an error because, as the third signatory and the supervisor, 
she was responsible for visually inspecting each of the computers to ensure that all hard 
drives had been removed in the declassification process. The security official then came 
and visually inspected all of the computers with Applicant and signed and certified that 
the computers were declassified and ready for transfer to the employee who had 
requested them. (Ex. 2 at 3; Tr. 127-129.) 
 
 The employee took possession of the computers and took them to his home for 
the weekend before transferring them to a youth group. The following Monday, the 
employee came to see Applicant and presented her with a hard drive he said he had 
found in one of the computers.  He said he had found a third hard drive mounted in an 
unusual place in one of the computers. The employee provided no documentary proof 
to corroborate his assertion that he had found the additional hard drive in one of the 
computers transferred to him by Applicant’s office. Additionally, the employee advised 
Applicant not to report that he had found the hard drive and to keep it as a confidence 
 
4 
 
 
between them. Applicant ignored his advice and informed her management of the 
discovery of the hard drive. (Tr. 129-130.) 
 
 As a consequence, the government contractor removed Applicant from the 
contract and transferred her to another position within the company.  The employer 
determined that Applicant’s action was not a security violation, and it was not reported 
as such. There was no compromise of classified information. However, the employer 
noted that Applicant had not complied with rules and regulations for protecting classified 
information. (Tr. 131-132.) 
 
 DOHA alleged that Applicant’s action violated DoD 5220.22-M, NISPOM, 
Chapter 5, Section 1 (January 1995). The relevant provisions read as follows: 
 
5-100. General. Contractors shall be responsible for safeguarding 
classified information in their custody or under their control. Individuals are 
responsible for safeguarding classified information entrusted to them.  The 
extent of protection afforded classified information shall be sufficient to 
reasonably foreclose the possibility of its loss or compromise. 
 
5-103. Perimeter Controls. Contractors authorized to store classified 
material shall establish and maintain a system to deter and detect 
unauthorized introduction or removal of classified material from their 
facility. The objective is to discourage the introduction or removal of 
classified material without proper authority. If the unauthorized introduction 
or removal of classified material can be reasonably foreclosed through 
technical means, which are encouraged, no further controls are  
necessary. 
 
(HE 1.) 
 
 The second Guideline K incident alleged by DOHA at SOR ¶ 1.b. occurred when 
Applicant was working in a non-classified area. Her work station computer was 
unclassified. Her duties included formatting resumes, scanning documents for various 
purposes, and creating PowerPoint presentations. Employees from within the 
organization came to Applicant for assistance in scanning and formatting documents. 
(Tr. 132-134.) 
 
 In October 2004, an employee (customer) working in another part of the 
company brought some documents compiled by countries in the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) and asked Applicant to scan them into one document for her 
supervisor. The documents were not classified, and the customer did not represent 
them as such.  One of the documents was stamped “NATO restricted,” which was not a 
classification description but a distribution description. Applicant scanned the materials 
as requested, and, after doing so, provided the scanned document to a fellow employee 
to format as requested by the customer. The fellow employee worked on the documents 
on her computer at home and noticed that one of the documents was stamped “NATO 
 
5 
 
 
restricted” and concluded that the document was classified. She suspected that a 
security violation had occurred. She reported the incident to the facility security officer 
(FSO), who concluded that Applicant had negligently failed to properly secure a NATO 
classified document and had negligently left the document unsecured on her desk 
overnight, in violation of DoD 5220.22-M, NISPOM, Chapter 5, Sections 1 and 3 
(January 1995). (Ex. 3, 8-14; Tr. 50-63, 134-138.) 
 
 The NISPOM provisions relied on by DOHA in support of this allegation specify 
procedures for safeguarding and storing information defined as classified by the U.S. 
government. (HE 1) 
 
 The customer who sought Applicant’s assistance in scanning the documents 
appeared as a witness. She was familiar with the sections of the NISPOM that relate to 
NATO security. Her testimony contradicted the FSO’s conclusion that Applicant had 
failed to comply with NISPOM rules and regulations for protecting and storing NATO 
restricted material.  (Tr. 55-57.)  
 
 Section 7 of the NISPOM defines security requirements for compliance 
procedures established by the U.S. Security Authority for NATO (USSAN) for 
safeguarding NATO information provided to U.S. industry. Section 10-702 of the 
NISPOM provides the following definition of NATO Restricted:  
 
10-702. NATO RESTRICTED.  NATO RESTRICTED does not correspond 
to an equivalent U.S. classification. NATO RESTRICTED does not require 
a PCL [employee personnel clearance] for access. An FCL [facility 
clearance] is not required if the only information to which the company will 
have access is NATO RESTRICTED. IS [Information Systems] handling 
only NATO RESTRICTED information do not require certification or 
accreditation.  NATO RESTRICTED information may be included in U.S. 
unclassified documents. The U.S. document must be marked, “THIS 
DOCUMENT CONTAINS NATO RESTRICTED INFORMATION.” NATO 
RESTRICTED material may be stored in locked filing cabinets, 
bookcases, desks, or other similar locked containers that will deter 
unauthorized access.  
 
(HE 3.)  
 
 The third Guideline K incident alleged by DOHA at SOR ¶ 1.c. occurred on April 
28, 2006. DOHA alleged that Applicant violated Sections 1 and 3 of Chapter 5 of the 
NISPOM (February 28, 2006) by negligently failing to properly secure a classified room 
which was consequently left unlocked overnight. The allegation is based on an incident 
report, dated May 5, 2006, prepared by the FSO employed by Applicant’s employer. 
(Ex. 3 at 15-16; Tr. 142-144.) 
 
 In her report, the FSO concluded Applicant was negligent in failing to properly 
secure the classified room and provided the following information: 
 
6 
 
 
On Monday, 1 May [2006] at 1630, the FSO was doing her evening check 
on the secured Room #25 that contains two classified computers and two 
GSA safes. The door to Room #25 was shut but left unlocked. The FSO 
checked the room for any open containers or documents that may have 
been left out. The classified computers were found to be down graded 
properly with the classified hard drives secured in the safes. The safes 
were found to be securely locked and there were no documents left out in 
the room.  An inventory of the documents was taken.  None were missing. 
 
[Applicant] was the last person to sign out on Room #25 on Friday, 28 
April 2006. Unfortunately, on that day the FSO and her back up were not 
in the office [to] do the evening check on the room.  On Monday evening, 
when the room was found shut but unlocked, the sign out sheet posted on 
the door before entering Room #25 noted that no one used the room on 
Monday.  The FSO questioned all employees who had keys to the Room. 
This action assured the FSO that the room had not been used on Monday, 
1 May 2006. 
 
It is concluded that Room #25, the safe or any classified documents in the 
safe, the classified hard drives or the desktop computers [sic] were not 
compromised.  [Applicant] has been instructed to ensure the door is 
locked and properly shut when she is leaving either during work hours or 
at the end of the day.  Furthermore, the FSO will train an alternate back up 
to the back up so that the door is checked every day. 
 
(Ex. 3, at 15-16.) 
 
 Applicant provided for administrative notice a calendar for April and the first week 
of May 2006. The calendar reflected that April 28 fell on a Friday in 2006. She also 
provided a copy of the employer’s log sheet for secured Room #25 for the period of 
April 24, 2006 to May 8, 2006. At the top of the log sheet is the following statement: “I 
certify that I have unlocked, locked, or checked Room #25 at the time and date 
indicated by my signature below.” On the log sheet were spaces for an individual to sign 
if he or she opened the secured room, closed and locked the secured room, or checked 
the secured room to ensure that it was properly locked. (Ex. A; HE 2.) 
 
 The log sheet reveals that Applicant certified by her signature that she opened 
and entered secured Room #25 at 8:55 am on April 28, and she closed and locked the 
secured room at 10:55 am on April 28. No other employees signed the log sheet to 
indicate they had opened or locked secured Room #25 on Friday, April 28, 2006. The 
log sheet shows that the room was not checked by the FSO or other facility security 
staff on Friday, April 28. There are no entries for Saturday, April 29, 2006. (Ex.A.) 
 
 The log sheet shows that on Sunday, April 30, 2006, no employee opened or 
locked the secured room #25.  On Sunday, the FSO checked secured room #25 and 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
signed her name at 12:00.1  The log sheet also shows that on Monday, May 1, 2006, no 
employees opened or locked secured room #25. The log sheet shows that on Monday, 
May 1, 2006, the FSO checked secured room #25 at “18:30,” and signed the log.  (Ex. 
A; HE 2; Tr. 144-148.) 
 
 The FSO’s report makes no mention of her inspection of the room on Sunday,  
April 30, 2006, when she apparently found the secure room locked. No one had signed 
the log indicating access or departure after Applicant left the room on Friday, April 28, 
and the FSO’s inspection on Sunday, April 30. If the room was locked when it was 
checked by the FSO on Sunday, her conclusion that Applicant failed to lock the door on 
Friday was not credible. (Ex. A; Tr. 147-148.) 
 
 The fourth Guideline K incident, alleged by DOHA at SOR ¶ 1.d., occurred on 
September 12, 2006, when a senior manager, who was not her direct supervisor, came 
to Applicant’s desk, along with an employee who reported to the supervisor. Applicant’s 
desk was located in an unclassified area, and she had the only operating scanner in the 
building. As a part of her regular duties, she routinely carried out requests by other 
employees and managers who brought her documents to scan and format. The 
manager presented Applicant with a document containing approximately five pages. 
The pages on the document were folded back, revealing a top page containing an 
unclassified signature. The manager asked Applicant to scan the signature on the top 
page, put it on a compact disk (CD), and give the CD to a second employee, who would 
take it to a classified room and put it in a safe.  (Tr. 70-73, 100-101, 157.) 
 
 The manager did not tell Applicant or the other employee that the five-page 
document contained classified information. There were no visible cover pages or 
conventional color coded markings normally used by the government contractor 
employer to indicate that the document contained classified information. The manager 
expected that the employee she supervised would return the document to a classified 
safe after the signature had been scanned and formatted. (Tr. 76, 102-103.) 
 
 Applicant scanned the signature, put it on a CD, and gave the CD to the second 
employee. The second employee left Applicant’s work area with the CD and took it to be 
stored in a classified safe. Applicant turned to other assigned work. The document, 
which she did not know contained classified information, remained on her desk. It was 
not unusual for individuals who asked Applicant to scan and format documents to leave 
them or to indicate that the documents did not need to be returned. Applicant did not 
look further at the document, and it remained there when she left at the end of the work 
day.  (Ex. 3, at 17-18; Tr. 149-151, 153-154.) 
 
 When she arrived at work the next day, Applicant saw the document on her desk, 
looked closely at it, and discovered a page with the word “secret” stamped on it.  She 
immediately took the document to the manager and told her what had transpired. The 
 
1The record does not indicate whether the room was checked at 12:00 am or 12:00 pm. 
 
8 
 
 
manager returned the document to the classified safe.  Applicant was rebriefed on the 
handling of classified information. (Ex. 3 at 18; Tr. 166-167.) 
 
 DOHA alleged that Applicant negligently failed to properly secure a classified 
document and negligently left the document unsecured on her desk overnight, in 
violation of Sections 1 and 3 of Chapter 5 of the NISPOM (February 28, 2006). DOHA 
also alleged that Applicant’s conduct in failing to protect classified or sensitive 
information raised security concerns under the Personal Conduct adjudicative guideline.  
 
 Several of Applicant’s co-workers and supervisors provided letters of character 
reference on her behalf. They praised her as diligent, conscientious, truthful, dedicated, 
and a hard worker. They identified her as productive, dedicated to the mission of her 
office, and compliant with operating rules and regulations. Applicant’s performance 
evaluations from 2002 through 2007 reflected above average performance and initiative 
in learning new skills of value to the organization. (Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. 
F; Ex. G; Ex. H; Ex. I; Ex. J; Ex. K;  and Ex. L.)  
 
 For the past two years, Applicant has taken steps to avoid situations that might 
give rise to allegations of security violations in the future. She has created unofficial 
forms that she asks her customers to fill in when they ask her to carry out tasks. With 
these forms, she clarifies at the beginning of an assignment whether the work assigned 
to her is classified or unclassified.  Additionally, she has created an unofficial log system 
for keeping track of classified material she is responsible for. She has learned to be less 
trusting and ask for clarification from higher levels of management when she is tasked 
with responsibilities related to classified information. (Tr. 158-159; 179-181.) 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
9 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶33 describes the Guideline K security concern as follows: “Deliberate or 
negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other 
sensitive information raises doubt about an individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, 
reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such information. . . .” 
 
 The Government properly conceded that it had failed to prove by substantial 
evidence the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c. After my independent analysis, I 
agree.  Accordingly, those allegations are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant was cited for a security violation for allowing a classified 
document to remain on her desk, unprotected, overnight. The record testimony 
established that Applicant was asked by a program manager to scan and format an 
unclassified signature on an unclassified page of the document. The program manager 
failed to inform Applicant that other parts of the document that she could not see were 
classified, and the document was not overtly marked as classified according to the color 
code for classified information used by the government contractor employer. Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
did not examine the document to see if it was classified, and on the information she had 
received, she had no reason to do so. 
 
 Applicant admitted that the document remained on her desk overnight. It was not 
unusual for Applicant to retain unclassified documents that she had worked on during 
the day. When she discovered the next morning that the document contained a 
classified marking, she immediately notified the program manager and returned the 
document to the manager.  
 
 I conclude that Applicant’s actions did not constitute deliberate or negligent 
failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive 
information.  Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant provided relevant and material facts 
to rebut the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.d.  SOR allegation ¶ 1.d. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 The remaining SOR allegation, ¶ 1.a., recounts that in 2002, Applicant signed 
required certifications that all hard drives had been removed from classified computers 
that were to be released as surplus for private use by a youth group.  She did this 
without following required procedures that she, as the supervisor of the unit, physically 
examine the computers and independently review the previous certification of a 
subordinate. Applicant’s failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
other sensitive information raises security concerns under AG ¶ 34 (g), which reads: 
“any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive 
information.”     
 
 Two Guideline K mitigating conditions might be applicable to the facts alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.a.  AG ¶ 35(a) reads: “so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it 
happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” AG ¶ 35(b) reads: “The individual responded favorably to counseling or 
remedial security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of security responsibilities.” 
 
 Applicant’s alleged security violation occurred in May 2002, and it is therefore not 
recent. The incident happened under unusual circumstances, and Applicant correctly 
reported to her facility security officer that she received a discrepant hard drive from the 
individual who took delivery of the declassified computers on behalf of a youth group. I 
conclude that, when viewed in light of Applicant’s present reputation for care and 
diligence, it is not likely that a similar incident will occur in the future, and this 2002 
incident does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Her action did not result in the compromise of classified information. I 
conclude that AG ¶ 35(a) applies to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
 After her alleged security incidents, Applicant received remedial security training.  
She provided credible testimony about the attention she now gives to ensuring that she 
identifies and protects classified information entrusted to her care.  I conclude that AG ¶ 
35(b) also applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
11 
 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR concluded that Applicant’s personal conduct related to her failure to 
properly secure classified information, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c, and 1.d, 
raised doubts about her judgment, reliability, and ability to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Under the Personal Conduct guideline “[c]onduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.”  AG ¶15. 
 
  I have considered all of the Personal Conduct disqualifying conditions. Applicant 
was entrusted with a security clearance, which her employer relied upon in employing 
her. She was responsible for following her employer’s and the NISPOM’s policies for 
protecting classified information. I conclude that that the evidence in this case 
establishes that Applicant rebutted or mitigated the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline K. I conclude that no additional disqualifying conditions apply to that 
conduct under the Personal Conduct adjudicative guideline.  Accordingly, the Guideline 
E allegation in the SOR is concluded for Applicant.  
     
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. Several 
of the security incidents attributed to her were the result of miscommunication and 
misinformation. She has learned from her mistakes, and she has put in place a method 
to ensure she receives sufficient information to protect the classified information she is 
entrusted with. 
 
 
12 
 
 
I observed Applicant carefully at her security clearance hearing.  I found her to be 
a serious and responsible person. I believe it is highly unlikely that in the future she will 
fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with a security 
clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that she is not a 
security risk at this time. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant rebutted and mitigated all security concerns arising under Guideline 
K and Guideline E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d:          For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:            FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:                      For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
