                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-16144 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James S. DelSordo, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant successfully mitigated personal conduct concerns that arose from her 
past employment. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 11, 2007. On December 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 1, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received her response on January 7, 
2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 5, 2009, and I 
received the case assignment on February 10, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on February 18, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 3, 2009. On March 2, 2009, 
Counsel for Applicant entered an Appearance and a Request for a Continuance, which I 
granted. On March 3, 2009, DOHA issued an amended notice of hearing scheduling the 
hearing for March 18, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, and an 
Administrative Notice Document, Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Government also offered a List of 
Government Exhibits, Ex. II. GE 1 through 5 were received without objection; however, 
Counsel for Applicant objected to GE 6 through 8 (except for page 1 of GE 8, which was 
contained in GE 4) and Ex. I on relevancy grounds. After argument by counsel, I 
sustained Counsel for Applicant’s objection. Tr. 15-27, 106-107. 
 
The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received 
without objection, and testified on her own behalf. Tr. 28-29. I held the record open until 
April 1, 2009 to afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. 
Applicant timely submitted AE D, which was received without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 25, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Her admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old supervisor for a company that provides security 
services. She has been employed by her sponsoring defense contractor employer since 
June 2007. One month after being employed, she was promoted to lieutenant. GE 1, Tr. 
114. She seeks a security clearance to enhance her opportunities with her employer. Tr. 
24-27. She also works part-time for a second employer that provides security services.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1994. Tr. 113. She estimates she 
has completed a “year-and-a-half” of college. Tr. 73. She has never married and has 
three children, ages 14, 12, and 8. She is her children’s primary caretaker, and the 
father of her children shares financial responsibility with her. GE 1, Tr. 75-76.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
In August 1998, Applicant resigned under adverse circumstances from her 
position as a clothing store sales clerk. She had been employed for two months when a 
conflict developed between her and the store owner over her leaving the store during 
her lunch hour to cash her pay check. SOR ¶ 1.e. In 2005, she held three jobs as a 
security guard in which she resigned under adverse circumstances. The resignations 
occurred in April 2005, May 2005, and July 2005. Following her April 2005 resignation, 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
her two subsequent resignations followed jobs she held for a very short duration, i.e. 
one-to-two weeks. Applicant’s resignations primarily followed scheduling conflicts over 
her inability to exercise flexibility while fulfilling her responsibility as a single parent. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b. – 1. d. 
 
The most significant concern identified from Applicant’s past employment stem 
from her termination in May 2007. At the time, she was a security guard for a company 
that provided contract security services, and failed to turn in her firearm upon 
completion of her shift to her supervisor. Such a failure was a violation of state law and 
company policy. She explained her failure to turn in her firearm was an honest mistake, 
and but for this mistake, she would still be employed by that company. Response to 
SOR. At the time of her termination, she had worked for this company for one year 
without a firearm incident. Tr. 115-116. She explained at the time she was hired by this 
company, she received one day of weapons training that was “kind of rushed through” 
because her employer was under pressure to fill positions to meet the terms of their 
contract. Tr. 116.  
 
Two current supervisory personnel testified on Applicant’s behalf. The first 
witness was a Project Manager, who has supervised her for two years. He has held a 
top secret clearance for “probably 30 years.” He stated Applicant has received 
considerable training to include a 40-hour weapons course. He added that Applicant is a 
trustworthy employee, complies with all company rules and regulations, and is “very 
reliable.” He views her as one of his “key supervisors” and if granted a security 
clearance, he would place her in a position of greater responsibility. He would rank her 
among the top 10 of his 20 supervisors. Tr. 30-45. 
 
The second witness was a Training Instructor for her part-time employer. He has 
held a secret clearance for nine years. He stated Applicant has had no weapons 
violations while employed with his company and if she did, she would be immediately 
terminated. He described Applicant as an “exceptional employee.” Tr. 46-58. 
 
 Applicant submitted two reference letters. The first letter was from her Shift 
Supervisor, who described her as “great officer” who has strong inter-personal skills 
adding she was a “tremendous asset” on a recent high profile event. AE C. The second 
letter was from another Project Manager, who described Applicant as “dependable, 
reliable, hard working, and [e]xtremely dedicated to her family morals.” AE D. 
 
Policies 
 
The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.1 
 
1  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”2 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
2  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 15, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
Applicant’s conduct leading up to her dismissal in May 2007 for failing to turn in 
her firearm warrants application of  these two disqualifying conditions in whole or in part. 
Her failure to comply with company policy and state law led to her immediate dismissal. 
Application of these disqualifying conditions is less evident when attempting to apply 
them to her four previous resignations in 1998 and 2005, which in large part stemmed 
from personality and/or scheduling conflicts.  
 
Two mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to these 
disqualifying conditions: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 Applicant receives credit under AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) for taking responsibility for 
her actions, receiving substantial additional firearms training, and having had no similar 
recurrences. She credibly explained her failure to turn in her firearm at the end of her 
shift was an honest mistake. Understandably, her employer took a no tolerance policy 
for her oversight and she paid the consequences. She understands similar mistakes are 
not acceptable. Applicant’s performance under her sponsoring employer as well as with 
her part-time employer has been commendable. Shortly after she was hired in June 
2007, she was promoted to lieutenant and fulfills a supervisory role. 
 Her 1998 and 2005 resignations occurred eleven and four years ago, 
respectively. In 1998, her two oldest children were ages 3 and 1, and in 2005 her 
children were 10, 8, and 4. As the primary caretaker for her children, she did not have 
the flexibility of being able to adjust her schedule on short notice. In any event, this 
chapter on her life appears to be behind her as her children have matured and there 
have been no reported incidents of similar employment conflicts. 
 Since her 2007 termination, she has built up an impressive employment history 
to the extent that two supervisors testified on her behalf and two additional supervisors 
submitted reference letters on her behalf. They collectively describe her as trustworthy, 
reliable, personable, and an asset to their respective companies. 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s behavior as it pertains 
to the 1998 and 2005 resignations as not recent and her 2007 termination as isolated. 
Considering the subsequent rehabilitative measures she has taken coupled with her 
increased maturity and favorable employment record, and other factors identified supra, 
I find her favorable information outweighs her past employment difficulties. Her record 
and accomplishments over the past two years alleviates questions about her ability and 
willingness to follow the law and/or company policy. Applicant appears to be doing her 
level best to balance between the competing interests and responsibility owed to her 
family and employers. Based on the evidence presented, Applicant has sufficiently 
addressed concerns related to judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the personal conduct concerns raised as a result of her past employment 
record. She has met her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole person concept was given due 
consideration and that analysis supports a favorable decision. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
she is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
