  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14691 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has six delinquent accounts totaling more than $21,000, which have 
been placed for collection. No payment has been made on these obligations nor has a 
repayment plan been established. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the 
government’s security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 31, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On February 2, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated March 10, 2009. The FORM 
contained 10 attachments. On March 17, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, 
along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on April 16, 2009. As of May 15, 2009, no response had been 
received. On May 15, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the factual allegations of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old security guard who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In June 2001, Applicant was laid off by his employer of seven years where he 
had worked as a manufacturing technician, engineering technician, manufacturing 
supervisor, purchasing agent and systems administrator. (Item 5) From July 2001 until 
December 2001, Applicant was unemployed. His yearly income decreased from 
$40,000 to $20,000 when he obtained a job as a software technician during tax season. 
From April 2002 until August 2004, Applicant was again unemployed. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant moved from his two bedroom apartment to a friend’s couch. His Ford 
pick-up, which he had purchased just prior being laid off, was repossessed. His goods 
were placed in storage and later sold to pay past due rent on the storage unit. 
Applicant’s depression, which was first diagnosed when Applicant was in his 20’s, 
intensified during this period. Applicant returned to school which increased his financial 
obligations. (Item 6, 7) In August 2004, Applicant started working at a temporary 
employment agency until November 2005 when he started at his current job. (Item 5)  
 
 In Applicant’s June 20, 2006 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), Applicant lists an October 2003 vehicle repossession with a debt of 
$8,550 remaining to be paid. As of August 2008, when Applicant completed the written 
interrogatories (Item 6), he stated his monthly disposable income (gross income less 
expenses) was $350. Applicant pays approximately $250 per month on his student 
loans. (Item 6)  
 
 
 
 
3
Being a student and unemployed caused Applicant’s debts to become 
delinquent. (Item 7) Applicant admits to owing the six past due obligations, which have 
been placed for collection, listed in SOR. (Item 4) None of the debts, which total 
approximately $21,000, have been paid nor is there evidence of payments being made 
on these debts. The first debt of $14525 (SOR ¶ 1.a) was the repossessed pick-up truck 
previously discussed. In April 2001, Applicant had obtained the approximately $31,000 
auto loan. (Item 9, page C-1) The $340 debt (SOR ¶ 1.b) is a collection agency 
attempting to collect a past due telephone bill. 
 
 The $2,954 debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) was a national credit card account opened in 
February 1995, which has been charged off. The $330 debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) is a collection 
agency attempting to collect a different past due telephone bill. The last two accounts 
are the same collection agency attempting to collect for two different national 
department store accounts (SOR ¶ 1.e, $2,044 and SOR ¶ 1.f, $1,190). 
  
 In March 2008, when Applicant completed an affidavit (Item 7), he stated he 
would contact his creditors and start paying back his past due debts. He also stated he 
would set up a payment schedule for some of the debt. Applicant referenced six of the 
seven SOR debts in his affidavit. No evidence of payment has been received. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
 
 
4
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
5
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his 
interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, his SOR 
response, and his response to interrogatories. Throughout this process, he had 
admitted responsibility for his delinquent debs, totaling about $21,000. He has provided 
insufficient documentation to show significant progress towards resolving his debts. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the debts were incurred a while ago, but because they remain 
unpaid, the debts are recent and numerous. He was laid off from an employer he had 
been with for seven years. It is difficult to say if being laid off is an event which occurred 
under such a circumstance that it is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) has limited 
applicability.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his 
periods of unemployment. In June 2001, he was laid off from his job of seven years. 
From July 2001 until December 2001, Applicant was unemployed. His yearly income 
decreased from $40,000 to $20,000. From April 2002 until August 2004, Applicant was 
again unemployed. A couple of short-term jobs followed. In November 2005, he 
obtained his current job. AG & 20(b) has some applicability since his financial problems 
were largely beyond his control. Applicant must act responsibility under the 
 
 
 
6
circumstances and since being employed with his current job, there is no showing of 
payments being made.  
 
AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply. There is no indication there has been 
financial counseling or the financial problems are under control. None of the SOR debts 
have been paid nor is there a repayment plan in place. Applicant has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay his student loans, but his student loans are not debts of concern 
listed in the SOR.  
 
 AG & 20(e) does not apply because there is no evidence Applicant disputes the 
legitimacy of the past-due debts or has provided documented proof to substantiate a 
dispute.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems were 
contributed to by his unemployment and educational expenses. However, he has been 
gainfully employed for three and a half years and no payment on the debts has been 
shown. It is noted that two of the debts each total less than $350 and even these debts 
have not been paid.  
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to his 
truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and 
honest. Even if I found for him in these matters, there is no evidence of payment on the 
delinquent debts.  
 
 
 
 
7
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a 
security clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Consideration: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.f: Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
               
