 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02786 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On July 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2008 and October 3, 2008, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to an 
administrative judge on December 8, 2008, and reassigned to another administrative 
judge on January 5, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 12, 2009, 
scheduling the case for January 27, 2009. Applicant was granted a continuance based 
 
2 
 
upon a death in the family. The case was reassigned to me on March 20, 2009. DOHA 
issued another notice of hearing on March 23, 2009, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 9, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
were received without objection. The Government also offered a demonstrative exhibit 
which was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified on his own behalf but did 
not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open for Applicant to 
submit documentary evidence. Applicant submitted 14 pages of documents, which were 
marked AE A through I, and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked HE II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
April 17, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1998. From 1998 through 2002, he worked in one state. In 
2002, his company transferred him to the state where he currently lives. He served on 
active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 1980 to 1993, when he was honorably discharged 
as a technical sergeant (E-6). He has maintained a security clearance throughout his 
military career and most of his post-military employment. He has an associate’s degree 
awarded in 1992. He has been married since 2003, having been married and divorced 
twice previously. He has three children from his first marriage, ages 23, 21, and 19. He 
also has a seven-year-old stepchild.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts. Twelve of the debts total $69,131, and 
there is a delinquent mortgage loan. Applicant denied all the allegations in his answer to 
the SOR.  
 
 Applicant was married to his second wife from 1991 to 2002. The marriage 
ended abruptly when he discovered his wife was being unfaithful. She moved out of 
their house and she filed for divorce shortly thereafter. She was represented by an 
attorney; he was not. Applicant consented and the court ordered, that he pay $300 per 
month in spousal support for three years. Division of liabilities was apparently not 
specifically addressed in the court order.2  
 
 Applicant’s former wife filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy about the same time as the 
divorce was pending. The exact dates when the bankruptcy was filed and her debts 
discharged are unclear, but Applicant believes they occurred before the divorce was 
final. When he learned that she filed bankruptcy, he discussed it with his supervisor. 
The supervisor advised him to obtain legal advice and, if necessary, that he would lend 
Applicant the money for a lawyer. Applicant stated that he refused the loan because he 
did not want to borrow money from a supervisor and he realized that he would have to 
pay the money back. He sought and received free legal advice at the local legal aid 
office. He asked the legal aid attorney how his wife’s bankruptcy petition affected him. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-21, 37-38, 41; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-23, 30; GE 2; AE B-I. 
 
 
3 
 
He was advised that their joint debts were discharged and that he was no longer 
responsible for the debts. The attorney told him that he should inform any creditors that 
the debts were discharged in bankruptcy and were no longer his responsibility. He 
informed the creditors of this fact and he stopped receiving collection phone calls and 
collection notices. He was also informed that the debts would remain on his credit report 
for some time, but would eventually fall off the report.3  
 
 Applicant’s separation and divorce exacted a financial toll on him. He was paying 
a large amount in child support to his first wife. He and his wife were barely making 
ends meet with their combined incomes when they were together. She handled the 
family’s finances because he was frequently traveling for work. After the separation, it 
became difficult to meet all the bills. In the summer of 2002, Applicant was offered the 
opportunity to transfer and work with the same company in another state. He relocated 
shortly after the divorce was finalized. The house in the original state went into 
foreclosure and was eventually lost to foreclosure. It is unclear if there was any 
deficiency owed on the mortgage after the house was sold. Applicant thought the 
mortgage was included in his wife’s bankruptcy and he was absolved of any liability if 
there was a deficiency.4  
 
 Applicant denied owing the debts in the SOR because he honestly believed they 
were no longer valid debts. The only debt that he does not admit was a legitimate debt 
before the bankruptcy is the $199 debt to a collection company on behalf of a public 
utility. He thought this was a utility bill from while he was still in the Air Force, which he 
thought he had paid. This debt is listed on the June 14, 2007 credit report, but not the 
credit report of January 22, 2009. Applicant was very credible and convincing in his 
testimony about the advice from the legal aid attorney, and his actions in reliance upon 
that advice. When he was informed that the discharge of his wife’s debts in bankruptcy 
did not affect his liability for the debts, he appeared genuinely surprised and distraught.5  
 
 After the bankruptcy, Applicant continued to pay the accounts that were solely in 
his name. He paid the spousal support for the full three years. He maintained his child 
support payments. He was informed that he owed the IRS for his 2001 taxes and he 
paid the IRS through a 12-month payment plan. Several of the debts listed in the SOR 
are not listed on the most recent credit report in evidence. Many of the remaining debts 
will soon reach the seven-year credit report limit for reporting adverse entries. Applicant 
is current on his taxes. His children are now adults and he no longer pays child support. 
He does not owe any back child support.6  
  
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 21-25; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-30; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
5 Tr. at 22-28, 36; GE 2-5. 
6 Tr. at 30-31, 38-41; GE 2-5. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and did not pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were related to a costly separation and divorce. 
His wife had her debts discharged in bankruptcy. Applicant sought legal advice from the 
local legal aid office to find out how his wife’s bankruptcy affected his legal liabilities. He 
was told that the bankruptcy also absolved him of liability for the debts. He acted on the 
advice and has not done anything in the last seven years to address the debts. The 
advice was legally incorrect, but Applicant’s reliance on the advice was not 
unreasonable. I find that the bad legal advice clearly is a circumstance that it is unlikely 
to recur and the behavior happened so long ago that it does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
applicable. I find that both the divorce and the bad legal advice qualify as conditions that 
were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant followed what he considered to be valid legal 
advice. That is not irresponsible conduct even if the advice was legally incorrect. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. No other mitigating condition is applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. This is a unique 
case. Applicant honestly believed the legal advice that when his ex-wife’s bankruptcy 
discharged the joint marital debts, his responsibility for the debts was also discharged. 
That advice was wrong, but he acted in good faith upon it. The divorce and bankruptcy 
 
7 
 
were both almost seven years ago. His finances are otherwise in order. He is an 
honorably discharged veteran and has a stable work history. AG ¶ 18 sets out the 
security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations. It discusses two 
similar but not identical concerns. The first is that “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.” Applicant has lived within his means for the last seven years. He 
reasonably followed legal advice and did not pay debts that he honestly thought were 
no longer valid debts. Under the unique circumstances of this case, that did not indicate 
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. It 
also does not raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. The second concern identified in AG ¶ 18 is that “[a]n individual 
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” Applicant is not truly overextended. While some of the debts still appeared on 
the credit report of January 22, 2009, many have likely already fallen off or will shortly 
fall off his credit report. The creditors have long ago stopped pursuing Applicant and 
they are very likely barred from judicial action by the various statutes of limitations. The 
Appeal Board has looked with skepticism at an applicant who relies on the statute of 
limitations to avoid paying his or her debts.7 That is clearly not the current case. 
Applicant did not initiate the bankruptcy; he did not join in his wife’s bankruptcy petition; 
he did not file his own bankruptcy; and he did not sit idly by waiting until the creditors 
could no longer enforce their debts. He simply and honestly followed what turned out to 
be bad legal advice. That does not adversely reflect on his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 “The fact that Applicant may be insulated from collection actions with respect to a number of [his] debts 
due to the running of [his] state’s statute of limitations is of little mitigative value. The Board has 
previously noted that reliance on a statute of limitations does not constitute a good faith effort to resolve 
financial difficulties.” ADP Case No. 06-18900 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
