 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-05806 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On November 28, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 12, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 21, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 31, 2009, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 22, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted a statement that I marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) 1 and admitted into the record. On May 1, 2009, DOHA assigned the case 
to me. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR, except Paragraphs 1.j and 1.o. He admitted the allegations 
contained in Paragraphs 2. b and 2.c, and seemingly denied those in Paragraph 2.a.   
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and unmarried. He has six children, ages 7 to 21. Since 
June 1984, he has worked as a computer operator for a defense contractor. He 
obtained a Secret security clearance in January 1996. (Item 5) He noted in his April 
2009 statement that he does not presently have access to classified information. (AE 1) 
 
 In November 2007, Applicant completed an e-QIP. In response to Question 27(b) 
that requests information about garnishments or repossessions, Applicant disclosed a 
January 2003 garnishment for child support. He did not disclose an automobile 
repossession. In response to Questions 28(a) and (b), which asked whether he had any 
financial debts more than 90 or 180 days delinquent, he answered “No,” and did not 
disclose eleven delinquent debts.  
 
 In August 2008, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories regarding delinquent 
debts. (Item 6) Applicant submitted information about two garnishments for child support 
that were entered by the court: one in June 2002 and one in September 2007, for two 
separate children. The 2007 garnishment is for $840 per month. Applicant also 
completed a Personal Financial Statement. He earns approximately $59,000 annually. 
After paying the $840 garnishment and another $1,000 loan every month, his net 
monthly income is $1,162. His expenses are about $2,000, leaving him with a monthly 
deficit. (Item 6) 
 
 In responding to Questions 28(a) and (b) in the Interrogatories about his failure to 
disclose delinquent debts, Applicant explained that “My finance situation the past six 
years has no bearing on the job I have been doing for the past 24 years.” (Item 6)  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant again asserted that his financial situation did 
not have relevance to his job performance. He noted, “I have always safeguarded 
classified information without any security infractions.” (Item 4) He attributed his 
financial problems to the 2007 child support garnishment and noted that he could not 
get a second job because any additional income he might receive would raise his child 
support payments. (Id.) He admitted that he failed to disclose information regarding his 
delinquent debts because he “Answered the questions quickly as I do not see why my 
situation has anything to do with my performance at work.” (Id.) 
 
3 
 
 
  In that Answer, Applicant explained why he did not disclose the repossession of 
his automobile under Question 27 of the e-QIP. “When my 1999 Chevy suburban was 
repossessed I got it back the next day. When the transmission/transfer case stopped 
working I gave the truck back to the dealership, as I could not afford to pay the car 
payments and the cost of the maintenance.” Seemingly, he did not consider the return 
of his vehicle to be legal repossession.  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated December 2008 and December 
2007, Paragraph 1 of the SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts, totaling $34,565, which 
began accruing in 2003. (Items 7 and 8) The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n for $9,127 
should be for $6,523, which is the amount of the judgment entered in the matter. (Item 
6) All of the debts are unresolved, including the $740 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.j that 
Applicant denied. Applicant did not present any evidence that he contacted any of 
creditors or attempted to address the debts.  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a) an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c) Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Based on two CBRs and his statements, Applicant has been unable 
or unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing six years ago. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. The guideline includes examples of conditions 
that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), 
the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.@ Applicant’s multiple financial problems arose six years ago and continue to 
the present. Because the problems are ongoing and not isolated, it is likely that that 
they will continue in the future, and do cast doubt about his judgment. Hence, this 
condition does not apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 
5 
 
 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
did not offer any substantive evidence to support the application of this condition.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant did not present any evidence that 
he received credit counseling and/or that his financial problems are under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@ He did not provide evidence that he paid, attempted to pay or is on a 
repayment plan for any debt. AG & 20(d) does not apply. He denied one debt but did 
not produce documentation indicating that he successfully disputed debt. Such 
evidence is necessary to trigger mitigation under AG & 20(e), which applies when “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG & 20(f) is not 
applicable to the facts in this case.    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b and 2.c that Applicant falsified 
answers to three questions on the SF-86; to wit, he failed to disclose an automobile 
repossession and debts that were more than 90 and 180 delinquent. The Government 
contended that those omissions may raise a security concern and be disqualifying. The 
disqualifying condition alleged under AG ¶ 16 in this case is: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant disclosed a child support garnishment under Question 27(b), but apparently 
did not consider his voluntary relinquishment to be a legal repossession. Based on his 
explanation and the garnishment disclosure, I find that he did not intentionally withhold 
information about the repossession; hence, the Government did not establish a 
 
6 
 
 
disqualifying condition as to SOR ¶ 2(a). Applicant admitted that he willfully did not 
disclose any information about his delinquent debts because he did not think the 
Government had a right to know. The Government established disqualifications as to 
the allegations set forth in SOR ¶ 2(b) and ¶ 2(c).   
AG ¶ 17 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
After reviewing the above mitigating conditions, I find none of them are 
applicable. Applicant did not make any effort to promptly correct his omissions. He 
intentionally made a decision to withhold information based on his own belief. Although 
the omissions occurred less than two years ago, he continues to assert the 
appropriateness of that decision in 2009. He has not acknowledged his wrongful 
conduct, nor demonstrated that he has taken steps to eliminate vulnerability to duress.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 44 years old and has 
worked for his employer for almost 25 years, during which time he has held a security 
clearance for at least ten years. In August 2008, the Government sent him a set of 
Interrogatories, alerting him to the financial delinquencies that could adversely affect his 
security clearance. In his response to the Interrogatories, he essentially said that the 
delinquent debts should not be of concern to the Government based on his long history 
of successful employment. He also indicated that his financial problems are directly 
related to a court-ordered garnishment for child support, the second one levied against 
his pay in less than ten years. In February 2009, he received the SOR, detailing the 
specific debts in question and articulating concerns under the financial and personal 
conduct guidelines. In mid-April 2009, he received the FORM, notifying him that he had 
an additional 30 days to respond and submit documentary evidence. Despite having 
approximately eight months to address the Government’s concerns, including his 
deliberate decision to withhold requested information, he took no action. His failure to 
responsibly respond to those concerns calls into question his judgment and reliability. 
    
Given his long employment history and previous experience with the security 
clearance process, it is troubling that he did not take any affirmative steps to address 
the Government’s specific concerns when he learned of them. Based on his tight budget 
and lack of proof that he has attempted to address the outstanding debts in some way, 
similar problems are likely to occur in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues and personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:   Against Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:                                   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
