 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01980 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), on May 3, 
2007. On November 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence; Guideline C, Foreign Preference; and Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 3, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 14, 2009. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2009. On February 6, 
2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for February 24, 2009. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 - 5, which were admitted without objection. The Government requested that 
administrative notice be taken of one document with 15 attachments. The document 
 
2 
 
 
was marked as Hearing Exhibit I (Hearing Ex I) without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted three exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – C without 
objection. Applicant presented a typed copy of his opening and closing statements. 
(Hearing Exhibit II) Applicant testified and called five witnesses on his behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of hearing on March 4, 2009. The record was held open until 
March 10, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents.  No additional 
documents were submitted. 
 
 I issued a decision on March 24, 2009. I found that Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns raised under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology. I found he did not mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and I concluded it was not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. 
 
 On April 1, 2009, Applicant appealed my decision, providing evidence that was 
not provided before the close of the record.  Department Counsel filed a response to 
Applicant’s appeal stating that under the facts of the case an expedited remand would 
be the equitable resolution to put the pertinent evidence before the Administrative 
Judge. On April 16, 2009, the Appeal Board remanded the case for further processing 
based on the additional evidence submitted by Applicant in his appeal. The additional 
evidence is a two-page document marked as AE D. Based on a review of the case file, 
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, including the exhibit submitted by Applicant with his 
appeal, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The security concerns raised under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems are not addressed in this remand 
decision because the concerns were mitigated in my previous decision, dated March 24, 
2009.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old senior mechanical engineer employed with a 
Department of Defense contractor. He has worked for his current employer from 1985 to 
1992, and from 1996 to present. He has a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical 
engineering. He is married and has four daughters, ages 29, 27 and 12 year-old twins. 
He has held a SECRET clearance since 1985. (Tr at 7, 74-77; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Israel. He moved to the United States in 
February 1976. He completed his college education at a U.S. university. He attended 
the first two years of college in Israel. He met his wife on a previous trip to the United 
States. After a long distance courtship, they became engaged and he moved to the 
United States on a fiancé visa. Applicant became a United States citizen on June 27, 
1980. (Tr at 48-49; Gov 1; Gov 2)  
 
Applicant’s wife moved with her family to the United States when she was four 
years old. She became a U.S. citizen in 1968 and has continuously lived in the U.S. She 
 
3 
 
 
has no relatives living in Israel. All of their daughters were born and live in the U.S. (Tr 
at 74-77) His wife is a dual citizen of Israel and the U.S. by virtue of her birth in Israel. 
His children are considered dual citizens of Israel and the U.S. by virtue of their parents’ 
Israeli citizenship.  Prior to traveling to Israel to visit family in June 2007, the entire 
family applied for Israeli passports. The Israeli Consulate did not issue his wife a 
passport. Applicant is not sure why but thinks it was because she lived in the U.S. for 
such a lengthy period of time and never applied for an Israeli passport. Applicant and 
his children were each issued Israeli passports. They used the passports only to travel 
to Israel.  His wife traveled to Israel on her U.S. passport and had to go through the line 
for non-Israeli citizens when entering Israel. (Tr at 17, 45-46, 56)     
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Israel.  He possesses a valid Israeli 
passport. It was issued on March 12, 2007, and does not expire until March 11, 2017. 
He held a previous Israeli passport which was issued on June 19, 1996, and expired on 
June 18, 2001.  He renewed his Israeli passport because he believes it was the only 
way he could travel to Israel. (Tr at 52-53, 72) Applicant has a valid U.S. passport. 
Under cross-examination, Applicant admitted that he could travel as a non-Israeli citizen 
to Israel. He would have to wait in the non-Israeli citizen line while arriving in the 
country. (Tr at 64) 
 
In June 2007, Applicant and his family traveled to Israel on a two-week 
sightseeing tour. In October 2000, he traveled to Israel alone to visit family, staying for 
approximately 10 days. In the past, Applicant’s employer sent him to Israel on business 
trips. His employer had a partnership with an Israeli defense company to develop a 
missile for the U.S. Air Force. Applicant traveled to Israel on company business from 
June 1996 to December 1996, from October 2001 to December 2001, and for one week 
in July 2003. (Tr at 44-47, 89; Gov 3) 
 
Neither Applicant nor his wife and children receive benefits from Israel. He has 
no investments in Israel. He owns a home in the U.S. and all of his investments are 
located in the U.S. (Tr at 20, 72-73, 89; Gov 3; Gov 4) 
 
At hearing, Applicant stated that he is willing to renounce his Israeli citizenship 
and surrender his Israeli passport. Prior to the hearing, he inquired about the process at 
the Israeli consulate. They informed him that it would take approximately one year.  
Applicant believes that he cannot surrender his Israeli passport to the Israeli Consulate 
until after the renunciation of his Israeli citizenship is complete. Applicant had not 
started proceedings to renounce his Israeli citizenship and/or surrender his Israeli 
passport prior to the hearing. He was willing to surrender his Israeli passport to the 
company Facility Security Officer (FSO) pending the process of the renouncing his 
Israeli citizenship. (Tr at 18, 21, 58-68) 
 
 Applicant is concerned that he may need his Israeli passport to visit his mother 
should she become ill. If something should happen to his mother, he may ask the FSO 
to have his Israeli passport returned to him in order to travel to Israel to visit his mother. 
He was advised on several occasions during the hearing that if he does so it will raise a 
 
4 
 
 
security issue and could result in the revocation of his security clearance. (Tr at 61-62, 
64-65, 67, 150)    
 
Applicant testified that he would surrender his Israeli passport to the FSO within 
a week of the hearing. (Tr at 62) He claims the FSO told him that in other cases, 
applicants surrendered their foreign passports to the FSO and the passport was 
physically destroyed. The FSO apparently stated that he could not destroy Applicant’s 
Israeli passport because it is the property of the Israeli government. Applicant was not 
willing to destroy his Israeli passport for this same reason. The FSO did not testify about 
the passport issue at hearing. (Tr at 66-67)  
 
The record was held open for two weeks, to allow Applicant to submit evidence 
that he surrendered his Israeli passport to his FSO and documentation that he started 
the process to renounce his Israeli citizenship. I advised Applicant that if he needed 
additional time to contact Department Counsel to request a delay. Department Counsel 
would inform me of the request and an additional delay would likely be granted. (Tr at 
64, 149 - 150) 
 
At the end of the hearing, Applicant asked, “So you want me to start the process 
to surrender my passport to [name of FSO], he’s the security manager at Lockheed 
Martin?” (Tr at 149) He was told “yes” and told to have the FSO prepare an affidavit 
verifying that Applicant surrendered his Israeli passport to the FSO which Applicant 
could submit as proof of the surrender of his passport. Department Counsel advised the 
Applicant that if the FSO was looking for a standard format to contact Department 
Counsel and he would provide a sample memorandum. (Tr at 149-150) 
 
No additional documents were submitted during the two week period the record 
was left open.  I contacted Department Counsel at the close of the record to inquire 
whether Applicant had contacted Department Counsel and/or submitted anything. 
Applicant had not contacted Department Counsel.  
 
Applicant claims in his appeal, dated April 1, 2009, that there was a 
miscommunication between him and his security department. He claims that in similar 
cases the court has forwarded a letter of instruction at the completion of the case which 
provides direction to the security office. His security office thought such a letter would 
be forthcoming with instructions. He claims that he did not understand that the 
directions provided at the hearing were all that would take place. He attached a letter 
from his FSO which verified that he surrendered his valid Israeli passport to the FSO on 
April 1, 2009. (AE D) 
 
Five co-workers and/or supervisors testified on Applicant’s behalf at the hearing. 
They all referred to him as a hard worker who provides for his family. They described 
him as “trustworthy,” “honest,” and “positive.” (Tr at 99 – 134) Four additional co-
workers also wrote reference letters on Applicant’s behalf attesting to his favorable 
character and work ethic. (AE D) He has received several special recognition awards. 
(AE A; AE B) His performance reviews indicate that he is a valued employee. (AE C) 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 The concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline M, Use of 
Information Technology Systems, will not be addressed because they were not the 
basis for the remand decision.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.    
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC)10(a) (exercise of any 
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or 
through foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) 
possession of a current foreign passport); and FP DC ¶ 10(b) (action to acquire or 
obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen) apply. Applicant 
renewed his Israeli passport after becoming a U.S. citizen on June 27, 1980. The record 
evidence indicates Applicant renewed his Israeli passport on June 19, 1996. This 
passport expired on June 18, 2001. He also renewed his Israeli passport on March 12, 
2007. The passport does not expire until March 11, 2017.  Applicant was entitled to an 
Israeli passport by virtue of his status as an Israeli citizen.  His renewal of his Israeli 
passport and his use of his Israeli passport to travel to and from Israel is an exercise of 
foreign citizenship.  
 
Applicant arranged for his children to obtain Israeli passports when they traveled 
to Israel in 2007. They were born in the U.S. and could have used U.S. passports. This 
action also indicates a preference for his home country. While not alleged in the SOR 
under foreign preference, the Appeal Board has determined that even though crucial 
security concerns are not alleged in the SOR, the Judge may consider those security 
concerns when they are relevant and factually related to a disqualifying condition that 
was alleged in the SOR. ISCR 05-01820 at 3 n.4 (App. Bd. December 14, 2006) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-18860 at 8 (App. Bd. March 17, 2003) and ISCR Case No. 02-00305 
at 4 (App. Bd. February 12, 2003)).  
 
Since Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the government produced 
substantial evidence by way of exhibits to raise disqualifying conditions FP DC ¶ 10(a) 
and FP DC ¶ 10(b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15). An applicant 
has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never 
 
7 
 
 
shifts to the government (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (DOHA Appeal Board 
Decision, September 22, 2005)). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Preference. 
 
Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition (FP MC) ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is 
based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country) does not apply. While 
Applicant was born and raised in Israel, he continued to exercise his Israeli citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen.  He renewed his Israeli passport on several occasions 
and used it to travel to and from Israel. His application for and use of a foreign passport 
after becoming a U.S. was an exercise of dual citizenship and reveals a continued 
preference for his home country. 
 
FP MC ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship) applies. Applicant testified that he intended to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship. He testified that he contacted the Israeli consulate about the steps required 
to renounce his Israeli citizenship but had not started the process to renounce his Israeli 
citizenship.  FP MC ¶ 11(b) is given less weight because while Applicant expressed an 
intention to renounce his Israeli citizenship during the hearing, he also expressed a 
concern that he may need his Israeli passport in the future to travel to Israel to visit his 
mother.  
 
FP MC ¶ 11 ( c) (exercise of rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a 
minor) does not apply. Applicant exercised his Israeli citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
He was an adult when he became a U.S. citizen. 
 
FP MC ¶ 11 (d) (use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority) does not apply to the facts of this case. 
 
FP MC ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies because Applicant surrendered his 
current Israeli passport to his FSO on April 1, 2009, approximately one week after the  
decision was issued denying his access to classified information.  
 
I give this FP MC ¶ 11(e) little weight for the following reasons. Applicant was put 
on notice on November 14, 2008, when he was served the SOR that possession of a 
valid foreign passport was a security issue under Guideline C. He was provided a copy 
of the Directive with his SOR. The Directive lists the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline C. He was on notice as to what steps to take to mitigate the 
concerns raised under foreign preference. He took no steps to mitigate this issue prior 
to his hearing which occurred on February 24, 2009.  
 
 Although Applicant expressed his intent to surrender his valid foreign passport to 
his FSO during the hearing, it was clear he had reservations about surrendering his 
 
8 
 
 
Israeli passport. He testified that he may need to ask his FSO to return his Israeli 
passport in the future in order to visit his mother. He said he would surrender his valid 
Israeli passport within the next week. He delayed taking any steps to do so until after 
the record was closed and an adverse decision was issued. His actions to do not 
indicate a good-faith effort to mitigate the security concerns raised under foreign 
preference.  
 
 Applicant was provided sufficient instructions at the hearing on what needed to 
be done to show proof of surrender of his foreign passport to his FSO. He was advised 
if he needed additional time, he could submit a request for an extension of time. 
Although not required to, Department Counsel advised Applicant to call him if he 
needed a sample memorandum for his FSO to use to verify the surrender of his foreign 
passport. At hearing, Applicant was never told that the government would provide his 
security office a letter of instruction pertaining to the passport issue. The burden was 
always on Applicant to mitigate the security concerns raised pertaining to his 
possession of a valid foreign passport. Considering the extensive instructions provided 
to Applicant during the hearing, his assertion in his appeal that he was awaiting further 
instructions from the government is not credible.   
  
 Applicant’s renewal, possession and use of an Israeli foreign passport over a 
number of years after becoming a U.S. citizen indicates that he still has a preference for 
a foreign country. Although not alleged in the SOR under Guideline C, the fact that he 
arranged for his family to obtain Israeli passports prior to traveling to Israel in 2007, 
reinforces his preference for his home country. Although he eventually surrendered his 
valid foreign passport to his FSO, his expressed reluctance to do so at hearing, his 
statement that he may need to ask for it back in the future if he needs to visit his 
mother, and his extensive delay in taking action to surrender his foreign passport does 
not mitigate the foreign preference security concern. Security concerns under foreign 
preference are not mitigated.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s ties to the 
U.S. as well his relationship with his mother and two brothers who are citizens of and 
reside in Israel. I considered Applicant’s work history and the favorable testimony from 
Applicant’s current and former co-workers.  
 
I considered Applicant’s explanation to the Appeal Board as to why he did not 
surrender his Israeli passport prior to the close of the record. The record evidence 
contradicts his assertions and I do not find his excuse credible.  
 
Applicant had ample time prior to the hearing to address concerns related to his 
possession of a valid foreign passport. He did not do so but professed at hearing that he 
intended to do so within a week following the hearing. The record was held open for two 
weeks to allow him the opportunity to do so. Applicant had the burden to mitigate the 
security concerns raised under Guideline C involving the possession of a valid foreign 
passport. He ignored the instructions provided to him at hearing and did nothing during 
the two weeks the record was held open. After he received the decision denying his 
security clearance, he blamed the government and his security office while he took no 
action to ensure that his foreign passport was surrendered before the close of the 
record. Applicant’s post-hearing conduct raises questions about his reliability, integrity,  
trustworthiness, and his ability to follow rules and regulations.  
 
Applicant ultimately surrendered his valid foreign passport to his security office 
but only after his security clearance was denied. Considering his testimony at hearing 
that he may ask for it back in the future, it was not an unqualified surrender of his 
foreign passport. Doubts remain under the foreign preference concern. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
   
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     
 
 
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
