   
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07446 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes more than $42,000 in past due obligations that have been placed 
for collection. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 25, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
 On November 21, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On February 12, 2009, I was assigned the case. On February 19, 2009, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on March 17, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was held open one week to 
allow Applicant to submit documents. No documents were received. On March 31, 
2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.i, 1.j, and 1.o of the SOR. He admitted the remaining factual allegations. The 
admissions are admitted into evidence.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old internet security and vulnerability analyst who has 
worked for a defense contractor since December 2006, and is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance. (Tr. 18) The SOR alleges Applicant owes 17 debts totaling 
approximately $45,000. Applicant asserts four of the debts, which total approximately 
$3,300, are debts belonging to his ex-wife. Applicant asserts he returned some traction 
equipment (SOR ¶ 1.o, $355) used in his physical therapy. The equipment was not 
covered by his health insurance. In 2005, Applicant assets he retuned the item but was 
never credited with the return. (Tr. 41)  
 
 In September 2000, Applicant separated from the Navy as an E-5 having enlisted 
in January 1993. (Ex. 1) While in the Navy, Applicant held a clearance. (Tr. 23) From 
September 2000 until July 2003, he had three different sales jobs at which he stated he 
did not perform well. (Tr. 20-21) During those years there were also brief periods of 
unemployment. His wife worked as a self-employed court reporter. (Tr. 21) In July 2003, 
Applicant separated from his ex-wife and they divorced in March 2004. Prior to the 
marriage, Applicant’s now ex-wife had a son. Applicant and his wife married when the 
child was one year old. Following the divorce, Applicant agreed to provide tuition for a 
private school for the child and his ex-wife agreed to allow visitation. (Tr. 22) 
 
 Following the divorce, his ex-wife stayed in their home and assumed the 
mortgage. Applicant continued to make payments on real estate property located with 
the home. His ex-wife denied visitation when payments were not made. In order to keep 
his obligation to his ex-wife current so he could see the child, Applicant failed to make 
credit card payments. (Tr. 22)  
 
 In November 2008, in response to the SOR, Applicant stated he had put together 
a personal plan to pay off many of his debts in the coming months. He planned to start 
with the smaller and more recent debts and work backwards from there. The plan 
consisted of him and his wife understanding their debts. (Tr. 55) No payments have 
been made as a result of any plan.  
 
 
 
 
3
Applicant has made no payment on the $16,237 (SOR ¶ 1.a), $2,103 (SOR ¶ 
1.d), $1,478 (SOR ¶ 1.e), $283 (SOR ¶ 1.f, the remaining balance on a computer 
purchased while married and used by his ex-wife in her work), $2,688 (SOR ¶ 1.h), 
$1,014 (SOR ¶ 1.l), $15,893 (SOR ¶ 1.m), and $469 (SOR ¶ 1.p) he owes on a credit 
card debt. (Tr. 27) Applicant disputes the $15,893 (SOR ¶ 1.m) credit card debt. In 1999 
or 2000, he assets he made two payments in one month that were not properly credited 
to his account. (Tr. 39) He stopped making payments on the debt when he failed to 
receive a return call from a supervisor at the credit card company.  
 
Applicant asserts three of the debts (SOR ¶ 1.b, $80, SOR ¶ 1.c, $160, and SOR 
¶ 1.j, $411) were medical debts incurred by his ex-wife after they separated. (Tr. 29) 
While married, Applicant and his wife purchased a dining room set (SOR ¶ 1.i, $2,716), 
which was awarded in the divorce to his wife. (Tr. 33) Applicant offered to submit a copy 
of the divorce decree, but no copy of the decree was received following the hearing.  
 
Applicant asserted he thought he had paid the $243 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1.k), 
but provided no documentation showing payment. Applicant owes a $184 electrical bill 
(SOR ¶ 1.q). (Tr. 42)  
 
In July 2005, Applicant remarried. His wife is a case manager for a law firm. (Tr. 
44) Applicant and his wife do not have a budget. (Tr. 45) Applicant owns a 2007 pick up 
truck and his wife owns a 2006 car on which their combined monthly car payments are 
more than $1,000. Applicant also owes federal income tax for tax years 2003 through 
and including 2007. (Tr. 49) He owes more than $3,400 in tax on which he pays $200 
each month. (Tr. 56) Applicant and his wife have approximately $47,000 in student 
loans that are deferred until May 2009. (Tr. 62, 63)  
 
Applicant makes $58,000 a year. His wife makes $48,000. (Tr. 53-54) Applicant 
has three or four current credit card accounts each less than $1,000. He no longer uses 
the cards and is behind on payments for all the accounts. (Tr. 47) The credit card 
companies are calling him for payment. (Tr. 60)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
 
 
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
5
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant has 12 past due accounts placed for collection that total in excess 
of $42,000. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, his 
SOR response, and his testimony at hearing. Throughout this process, he had admitted 
responsibility for all but four delinquent debts. None of the debts have been paid. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
   
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has failed to document that four of the debts (SOR & 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, and 
1.j) are his ex-wife’s obligations. These debts total approximately $3,300. He failed to 
 
 
 
6
document the return of the $355 traction devise. (SOR & 1.o) Even accepting these five 
debts, which total less than $4,000, are not his obligations, he still has past due 
obligations placed for collection that total approximately $42,000. None of the mitigating 
factors apply to the remaining 12 past due obligations.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant’s debts remain unpaid so they are considered a 
current concern. There are numerous debts. The debts were incurred for credit card 
obligations, utility bills, and he owes past due federal tax. These debts are likely to 
recur. In fact Applicant is past due on his three or four current credit card accounts. AG 
¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced both separation and divorce along with 
the financial burden associated with each. However, he failed to establish how his 2004 
divorce affects his current ability to pay his debts. Applicant and his current wife have a 
combined income of more that $100,000 and the electric bill of less than $200 remains 
unpaid. AG & 20(b) has limited applicability.  
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant is paying the IRS $200 per month on 
his past due tax obligation for tax years 2003 through 2007. This is a good faith effort to 
repay his debt. However, his income tax obligation is not listed as a debt of concern in 
the SOR. He has made no payment on any debt listed in the SOR. He is behind on his 
current credit card accounts and receiving calls demanding he pay his bills. AG & 20(c) 
and & 20(d) do not apply. 
 
His failure to pay his past due obligations raises concerns about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 
 
 
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were mainly 
credit card obligations. His inability to repay these debts indicates poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. He and his wife make in 
excess of $100,000. They pay more than $1,000 each month in car payments. They are 
unable to keep the three or four credit card accounts, each of less than $1,000, paid in a 
timely manner. It is noted that three of Applicant’s past due debts are for less than $300 
each and another two are less than $500 each. He has been unable or unwilling to pay 
even these small debts.  
 
Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and is unable or 
unwilling to satisfy his debts. He accepts responsibility for the majority of his financial 
delinquencies. He has done little to resolve or manage his delinquent debts since 
learning of the government’s concern. All of the debts listed in the SOR remain 
unresolved. He has not established a budget. He has no plan for proper management of 
his finances and debts. There is no clear indication that his financial problems are being 
resolved or under control.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.o: For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a, 1.d through 1.h,  
1.k through 1.n, 1.p, and 1.q: Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
