Item 1.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------, ------ ------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-07447
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant owed more than $17,000 in four reported delinquent debts in March
2008. At least one of these debts, for $6,272, remains unresolved and insufficient
information was provided about the circumstances of any of them to mitigate security
concerns. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), on June
25, 2007. On October 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under
Guideline F.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding1
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Item 3.2
The Government submitted nine items in support of the allegations.3
Item 4 at 1-11.4
Item 3.5
Item 7.6
Item 3.7
Item 8 at 2.8
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 8, 2008, and requested that
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.2
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 9, 2009. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and3
he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on February 3, 2009, and returned it to DOHA. He did not submit any material in
refutation, extenuation or mitigation, and made no objection to consideration of any
evidence submitted by Department Counsel. I received the case assignment on April
15, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married, with
no children, and has been continuously employed since at least 1999. He retired in
1997 after 20 years of enlisted service in the Army, but never held a security clearance.4
In his response to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c,
and admitted the truth of SOR ¶ 1.d.  He stated, “I admit that my previous financial5
situation caused me to default of previous financial obligations.” He did not elaborate
further concerning that situation, however. Applicant’s admissions, including those
contained in his response to interrogatories,  are incorporated in the following findings.6
Applicant admits owing $6,272 to a large vacation ownership and resort
company. This debt became delinquent in April 2002. In December 2008, he said he
was “in the process of attempting to settle this situation.”  He provided no information7
concerning the origin of the debt or his reason for non-payment. This is the only one of
the four delinquencies alleged in the SOR to appear on his most recent record credit
bureau report (CBR).8
Applicant claimed that the $5,838 delinquent credit card debt in collections
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, was settled on July 6, 2006, with an agreed payment of $3,882.
He provided a poor copy of a bank statement showing issuance of a check from an
Item 3 at 1, 6; Item 5 at 4, 7, 10; Item 6 at 4, 5, 8; Item 8. 9
Item 3 at 1, 5; Item 5 at 13; Item 6 at 10; Item 8.10
Item 7 at 5.11
3
unidentified account in that amount on July 5, 2006. The payee was not identified on the
statement. He said he never received a receipt or other correspondence reflecting the
paid status of the account. The CBRs from July 2007 and March 2008 show that this
account was placed with the SOR-alleged collection agency in February 2007, well after
his reported settlement with the previous collection agency. The account numbers cited
by Applicant do not match those in the two CBRs, although there were other accounts
listed with the previous creditors on each CBR that reflect zero balances due to transfer
of the accounts to other creditors. This debt was reported by Experian on the two earlier
CBRs, but does not appear on the more recent October 2008 Equifax CBR. Applicant
provided no explanation concerning the origin of this debt or why it became delinquent.  9
SOR ¶ 1.b alleged a different delinquent credit card debt in collections in the
amount of $5,025 that remained unpaid as of March 12, 2008. Although Applicant
formally denied this, he implicitly admitted it by explaining that he had settled the debt
for a payment of $3,582 to a different debt collector in November 2008. The letter he
provided to document this payment did involve the same type of credit card, but the
account number does not match those cited in the CBRs. This debt was reported by
Trans Union on the two earlier CBRs, but does not appear on his October 3, 2008,
Equifax CBR despite the fact that the submitted letter reflects payment did not take
place until November 12, 2008. Again, Applicant provided no explanation concerning
the circumstances surrounding this delinquency.10
Applicant also denied SOR ¶ 1.c, that alleged a $101 delinquent debt resulting
from a returned check dating to June 2002. He said he does not recognize this debt or
know how it arose. It was reported by Equifax on his first two record CBRs, but does not
appear on the latest Equifax report. The record contains no further information
concerning this debt.  
Applicant offered no evidence of credit or financial counseling. He submitted a
Personal Financial Statement in August 2008 that showed $11,334 in monthly income
and $4,442 in total monthly expenses and debt payments, for a net monthly surplus of
$6,892. It also reflects $10,000 in bank savings.  Applicant offered no explanation for11
his delinquent debts in light of this apparent financial ability to resolve them. Applicant
offered no other evidence concerning his character, trustworthiness or responsibility. I
was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor or character in person since he elected
to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
4
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “Any determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:      
5
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” are potentially disqualifying. As recently as March 2008,
Applicant’s CBR reflected $17,236 in delinquent debt. He claimed one of those debts
had been settled in July 2006, some seven months before it was reportedly placed for
collection with the current creditor, but did not corroborate that claim with credible
evidence. He also claimed to have settled another of the debts in November 2008, but
without explanation for why it became delinquent. Neither of these two debts appears
on his October 2008 Equifax CBR, but both were reported by different services on the
earlier reports so that fact is not dispositive. The $101 returned check debt, formerly
reported by Equifax, disappeared from his most recent report so its validity is not
established at this stage. The existence of more than $17,000 in delinquencies in March
2008, some dating back to 2002, is sufficient to raise both of these disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination and balancing of resulting security concerns
with any potentially mitigating matters, and shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions may be
mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s financial
irresponsibility is both long-standing and continues to date. Although he reportedly has
substantial excess monthly income, he did not demonstrate that delinquent
indebtedness is unlikely to recur, since some delinquent debt remains and casts
continuing doubt on his trustworthiness. The evidence does not support application of
this potentially mitigating condition. 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant did not
demonstrate that any of his delinquent debt arose from circumstances that were beyond
his control. The one he admits still owing was for some type of vacation resort
arrangement. The other two major delinquencies were for credit cards, and the reasons
for the underlying charges or why he did not pay them in a timely fashion were not
provided. Applicant has not established mitigation of any of his debts under this
provision.
6
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). This mitigating condition was not asserted by
Applicant and there is no evidence to support it in this record. Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d)
applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant submitted insufficient evidence
to carry his burden of proof in support of his claim to have resolved the credit card debts
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and provided no evidence of progress toward resolving
his $6,272 debt that has been delinquent since 2002. It may be the case that some
mitigation would be established by his recent efforts to resolve his delinquencies, but
even if his claims are accepted, insufficient time and responsible performance has
occurred to date to alleviate the substantial security concerns raised by the length and
degree of financial irresponsibility that continues in part to date. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who
is responsible for his choices and conduct. He presently has at least $6,272 in
delinquent debt, and did not meet his burden to prove resolution of $10,863 in
delinquent credit card debt. None of his debt was shown to have arisen for reasons
beyond his control. 
Applicant has the apparent present ability to resolve financial delinquencies, but
offered no explanation for not having done so. His debts continue to create substantial
potential for pressure, coercion, or duress. He provided no information to indicate that
continuation or recurrence of financial problems could be considered unlikely. The
7
record contains insufficient other evidence about his character or responsibility to
mitigate these concerns, or tending to make their continuation less likely. 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his history of not meeting
his financial obligations and inability or unwillingness to satisfy his current debts. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
