1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-06802
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be denied.
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on October 19, 2006. On September 4, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
Item 2 (Response to SOR); Item 3.1
Item 2, supra note 1; Item 4 (e-QIP).2
Id.3
Item 5 (Interrogatories and attachments).4
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 16, 2008. He
submitted a notarized, written response to the SOR allegations on November 1, 2008,
and requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on February 12, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on
March 2, 2009. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit a response or
additional evidence. DOHA assigned this case to me on May 15, 2009. The government
submitted seven exhibits, which have been marked as Item 1-7 and admitted into the
record. Item 2 of the government’s exhibits is Applicant’s response to the SOR.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 1, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d and 1.f of the SOR, with explanations. He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.g, and 2.a of the SOR. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
Applicant, who is 35 years old, works as a logistics co-ordinator for a Department
of Defense contractor, a position he has held since 2006. He served on active duty in
the United States Air Force for four years and in the state Air Guard for more than
seven years. He received an honorable discharge from both.2
Applicant and his wife married in 1996 and they have three sons, ages 11, 7, and
4. After his discharge from active duty in 1997, Applicant worked several different
civilian jobs, which did not pay a salary commensurate with his military pay. As a result,
he experienced difficulty in paying his bills. He enlisted in the Air Guard to help stabilize
his income and work closer to home. Before accepting his present job, Applicant again
worked various low paying civilian jobs for a short period of time.3
Applicant currently earns $102,000 a year. His gross monthly income totals
approximately $8,500 and his net monthly income totals approximately $7,000. His
monthly expenses, including his mortgage and two car payments, total approximately
$5,000, leaving $2,000 for other expenses and repayment of debt. Applicant’s credit
reports reflect that he pays his current bills on time and that he has paid many of his
debts in a timely manner in the past. He lives within his financial means.4
Item 1 (SOR); Item 2, supra note 1, attachments; Item 6 (Credit Report, dated October 31, 2006) at 9; Item5
7 (Credit report, dated August 21, 2008) at 3.
Item 2, supra note 1; Item 5, supra note 4; Item 7 supra note 5.6
3
The SOR alleges $90,470 in unpaid debts based on credit reports dated October
31, 2006 and August 21, 2008. The largest debt relates to an unpaid mortgage debt of
$79,130. Applicant verified that this debt is fully paid and he does not owe any money to
this creditor. The SOR also indicates that Applicant is $1,000 past due on his current
mortgage, although this debt is not listed on either credit report. Both credit reports
verify that this mortgage debt is an account in good standing and the creditor does not
show any past due amount on the loan. Both of these debts are resolved.5
Applicant denies the debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.a, a telephone bill from 2000, and
1.e, an unidentified $125 medical bill from 2003. He acknowledged the $50 medical bill
in SOR ¶ 1.b. In his interview with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
investigator in September 2007, Applicant acknowledged the telephone debt and
indicated the medical bills belonged to his wife. He told the investigator that both
medical accounts had been paid, one in July 2006 and the other in June 2007. In his
response, Applicant indicated the telephone company no longer existed and the
collection agent could not find an account in his name. He also indicated that the
smaller medical bill had been submitted to the insurance company and the medical
office had cancelled the debt. These three debts are not shown on the August 21, 2008
credit report. Because the medical bills are no longer on his credit report and his
statements about the payment of these debts are consistent, I find that the two medical
bills are paid.
Applicant acknowledges he owed a car loan debt on an automobile his wife
wrecked in a car accident, but believed the debt had been resolved as the creditor again
loaned him money to buy a car in 2005. In his response, he submitted a letter which
shows that his present car loan with the same creditor is current. The account number
on his current car loan is not the same as the account number on the unpaid car loan
debt. Applicant has not provided any information which shows that this four year old
debt is paid or being resolved. This account is not listed on the August 21, 2008 credit
report. While he was in another area of the country for training, his wife failed to pay the
rent on an apartment she rented. In his response, he indicated the debt had been
satisfied, but he could not verify this information. This 2001 debt is not shown on the
August 21, 2008 credit report.6
Applicant completed his E–QIP on October 19, 2006. He answered “no” to the
following questions:
Question 28. Your Financial Delinquencies   
a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?
Item 2, supra note1; Item 5, supra note 4.7
4
b. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts?
Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified these answers. At the time he
completed his E-QIP, Applicant believed the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d and 1.e
belonged to his wife and he was unaware that any debts were in collection. He admits
he knew about the car loan, but believed it had been settled and was not an issue. In
his answers to interrogatories, he stated that he was unaware of any debts in collection.
The OPM investigator did not discuss his answers to these questions during the
interview.7
 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
5
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt in the past, which he
did not pay for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ While some of
his debts occurred some time ago, Applicant did not present evidence which shows that
his debts occurred under unusual circumstances which are not likely to reoccur in the
future. This mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant has not
Based on their age, these debts are barred from collection under the State Statute of Limitations.8
AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) are not raised in this case.9
6
provided any evidence which demonstrates that events beyond his control created his
past financial problems. I find this mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not sought or received financial
counseling. However, the evidence of record reflects that his usual finances are under
control. His monthly income is sufficient to cover his monthly expenses and provides
additional income to cover unexpected expenses each month. Both credit reports reflect
that over the years he has paid the majority of his debts in a timely manner. This
mitigating condition is partially applicable.
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant
demonstrated that the large mortgage debt is resolved and that his monthly mortgage
payment is current. While the August 2008 credit report does not show any overdue
debts, except the paid mortgage debt, Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence
that the rent, telephone and car debts are resolved. The rent debt and the telephone
debt are eight and nine years old respectively  and were most likely removed from the8
credit report due to age. Without more documentary evidence, I am unable to conclude
that these debts are resolved. The two medical bills are more recent and not likely to
have been removed from the credit report for age. Rather, Applicant’s statements that
these debts are resolved are paid supports an inference that these debts are paid. I
conclude this mitigating condition applies to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d through
1.g.9
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16(a) describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
See ISCR Case No. 07-08925 (App. Bd. Sept. 15, 2008); ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17,10
2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
Even if I were to find the government had established disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a), mitigating condition11
AG 18(f), the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability would apply as the
allegation of intentional falsification was unsubstantiated.
7
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s falsification must be deliberate. The
government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his e-QIP when he
answered “no” to Section 28 a and b about his past due debts. This information is
material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security clearance and
to his honesty. In his response, he denies, however, that he had an intent to hide
information about his finances. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the
government has the burden of proving the omission was deliberate. Proof of an
omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of
mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence
concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred.10
Applicant denied intentionally leaving out information about his overdue debts. At
the time, he completed his SF-86, none of his current debts were more than 90 days
past due. Thus, he did not falsify his answer to Question 28 b.  Concerning his “no”
answer to Question 28 a, Applicant’s failure to answer “yes” about his past debts is not
proof that he intentionally falsified his e-QIP. He knew about the unpaid car loan when
he completed his e-QIP, but thought it was resolved. He did not know about the other
debts listed in his credit, three of which he believed belonged to his wife. Based on his
beliefs, the government has not established that Applicant intended to hide his financial
situation from the government. His belief, although mistaken, does not reflect intentional
conduct on his part. Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant.11
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
8
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The major debt listed in the SOR is
resolved. Applicant’s financial statement indicates that he has sufficient income each
month to pay his monthly expenses and has additional financial resources for
unexpected expenses. He, however, has not provided sufficient information to explain
how the remaining significant debts occurred. He has not shown that circumstances
beyond his control caused these debts or that he has made an effort to resolve the
debts. He needs to provide documentary evidence to show that these debts are
resolved. Although he has not actually proven his debts are resolved, his belief at the
time he completed his e-QIP that his debts were not an issue is sufficient to establish
the lack of intent to falsify his answers on his security clearance application.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
