 
1 
 
 
                                           
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08--01935 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  Dana D. Jacobson, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, and 
after a whole person analysis that considered all relevant and material evidence, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the   
Foreign Influence adjudicative guideline. Her eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
On March 28, 2005, Applicant signed and certified a Security Clearance 
Application (SF-86).1 On October 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
 
1Applicant’s SF-86 showed she had signed the document on February 24, 2005 and March 28, 2005.  
The two signatures did not represent two versions of the same document, and she made no changes to 
the SF-86 between February 24, 2005 and March 28, 2005. (Tr. 119-120.) 
 
2 
 
 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Her answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on December 11, 
2008.  On February 26, 2009, Department Counsel gave notice that he was ready to 
proceed. On that same day, the case was assigned to me. I convened a hearing on 
April 14, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no 
witnesses and introduced four exhibits (Ex.), which were marked as Applicant’s Ex. 1 
through 4, and admitted to the record without objection. The Government also offered 
facts in seven official U.S. government documents for administrative notice. (HE I.) 
Applicant did not object to administrative notice of facts in the Government’s 
documents. Applicant introduced two exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A and B and 
admitted to the record without objection. She called one witness and testified on her 
own behalf.  
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business 
April 24, 2009, so that Applicant could, if she wished, submit additional information. 
Applicant timely filed five additional documents. These exhibits were marked as 
Applicant’s Ex. C through G and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on April 22, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations that raise security concerns under the Foreign 
Influence adjudicative guideline (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted four of the allegations and denied one, with explanation. Applicant’s 
admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old, never married, and employed as an Arabic linguist 
recruiter by a government contractor. She has worked as a federal contractor since 
2003. She seeks a security clearance. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Egypt. She received a Bachelor of Science 
degree from a university in Egypt.  She came to the United States as a tourist in 1994.  
After her tourist visa expired, she obtained a student visa. As a student, she supported 
herself with a variety of jobs, including childcare and administrative work. One of her 
employers sponsored her for a work permit and a U.S. Permanent Resident Card 
 
3 
 
 
(Green Card). She earned a Bachelor of Science degree in human resources 
management from a U.S. university. She became a U.S. citizen in September 2002. 
She purchased a home in the United States in 2006.  (Ex. 1;  Ex. 3; Ex. G; Tr. 59-69.) 
 
 Before becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant used her Egyptian passport for travel. 
She no longer has an active Egyptian passport. When she became a U.S. citizen, 
Applicant orally renounced her Egyptian citizenship.  Later, during an interview with a 
U.S. government agency, she voluntarily signed statements that she was not a citizen of 
Egypt and she again renounced her Egyptian citizenship. Since becoming a U.S. 
citizen, Applicant has used only her U.S. passport for travel outside of the United 
States. (Ex. 3; Ex. 4 at 19; Tr. 99- 01.) 
 
 Since coming to the United States, Applicant has traveled to Egypt five times.  In 
1999, she traveled to Egypt to comfort her family after one of her younger sisters was 
killed in an automobile accident. In 2000, Applicant returned to Egypt to visit her 
parents.  In 2003, Applicant went with a group of professional colleagues to a wedding 
in Egypt, but she did not visit her family members, who lived elsewhere in Egypt. In 
2004 and 2008, Applicant also traveled to Egypt to visit her family. (Tr. 93-99, 121-122.) 
 
 Applicant does not intend to return to Egypt or to stay there for any length of 
time. As a single woman, she could not travel freely in certain areas in Egypt or wear 
Western clothing. She appreciates the freedom she is accorded as an American citizen: 
“Yes, [in America] I feel like a complete person.  I can study whatever I feel like at any 
time. I can do it if I feel like it, but in Egypt, it’s going to be very difficult or almost 
impossible if I don’t have a man to protect me or someone to take care of me.”  (Tr. 90-
92.)   
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Egypt. Applicant’s father is 
approximately 80 years old, blind, bed-ridden, and unable to speak. Approximately 40 
years ago, he retired early as a policeman in an Egyptian city because he had a heart 
ailment. Applicant sponsored her mother for U.S. permanent resident status. For the 
past four years, Applicant’ mother has resided with Applicant in the United States for six 
months each year. Applicant’s mother expects to apply for U.S. citizenship in about one 
year.  Because of Applicant’s father’s serious health situation, her mother will likely 
return to live in Egypt after becoming a U.S. citizen.  Applicant provides her parents with 
approximately $200 each month to help with their living expenses. (Tr. 82-89, 105-107.) 
 
 Applicant’s younger sister came to the United States as a tourist in 1998. 
Approximately six months later, Applicant sponsored her sister when she applied for a 
student visa. The sister later married a naturalized U.S. citizen, who sponsored her for 
U.S. citizenship. Applicant’s sister, who is now divorced, became a U.S. citizen in July 
2005, and she resides in the United States. After becoming a U.S. citizen, the sister 
relinquished her Egyptian citizenship. Her last trip to Egypt was in December 2005, after 
she became a U.S. citizen.  She used her U.S. passport to travel to Egypt. (Ex. A; Ex. 
B; Tr. 41-55.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s two brothers are citizens and residents of Egypt. Her younger brother 
is a student and studying to become a computer engineer. Her older brother, who is 
married and the father of four children, formerly worked as an accountant and now 
teachers English at a high school. Although she has good relations with her brothers, 
Applicant is not in frequent contact with them. She telephones them occasionally to 
inquire after the health of her father and mother. None of Applicant’s immediate 
relatives have any connections to the government of Egypt.  She owns no property in 
Egypt; she has no bank accounts in Egypt; and she has no business ties with Egypt. 
(Tr. 88-90, 107-109, 126.) 
 
 In 2002, soon after becoming a U.S. citizen and after learning of the U.S. 
military’s need for Arab speakers to assist them in Iraq and Afghanistan, Applicant 
applied for a position as a contract Arab linguist and interpreter. She was accepted and 
sent to Iraq in April 2003, where, she served for two years as an Arab language 
interpreter. During that time, she accompanied troops on tactical raids and provided 
interpretations during interrogations. She also served as primary interpreter for military 
commanders in meetings with local officials, and served as a translator to assist 
wounded detainees and civilians. In her spare time, she taught Arabic to the U.S. 
troops, which aided them in their day-to-day interactions with Iraqis. During this time, 
she held an interim security clearance without incident. (Ex. C; Tr. 69-74, 113.) 
 
 One enlisted serviceman and two officers who worked with Applicant during her 
service in Iraq provided letters of character reference for her and described her role in 
their military operations. In November 2003, after observing Applicant on the job for 
nearly four months, a Staff Sergeant described Applicant’s contribution to the mission 
as follows: 
 
[Applicant] was on call, 24 hours a day and seven days a week. She has 
given up numerous hours of down-time in order to accomplish any 
translation mission required by the [omission]. She has assisted with all 
types of humanitarian missions by translating for local nationals who come 
to the front gate seeking assistance. [Applicant] has freely gone on tactical 
raids with . . . units to ensure the correct person is detained and to provide 
any on-site translations as required. These missions are not without their 
inherent risks and she is to be commended on her dedication to the 
mission at hand. 
 
(Ex. C.) 
 
 In January 2004, a U.S. military officer who worked closely with Applicant had 
this to say about her: 
 
I enthusiastically write this letter on behalf of [Applicant].  [Applicant] has 
served with distinction as an interpreter for this office since November 
2003 and has excelled far above my expectations. Indeed, she has 
become a trusted junior partner of the overall legal team responsible for 
 
5 
 
 
reconstituting the entire judicial system in . . . Iraq.  Without exception, 
[Applicant] responded affirmatively and positively no matter how 
unorthodox or unusual the task.  Whether it was questioning a witness in a 
hospital, talking to community leaders, or simply talking to claimants on a 
day-to-day basis, she was unflinching in her devotion to the task at hand 
and mission of the [military] over all. Her positive attitude was just 
remarkable. 
 
[Applicant’s] high-powered personality buoyed the entire office and 
established a progressive tone for the daily grind [of] serving dozens of 
disgruntled claimants. She often had to deal with claimants who were 
belligerent, insistent, stubborn, emotional, or just plain unfriendly.  She 
always maintained that razor’s edge when dealing with them, but just as 
important, she never once went over the edge with them either.  She was 
a picture of efficiency and professionalism. At once she could 
appropriately admonish an irate or unruly claimant and in the same 
moment gently stroke or console a bewildered child. That range of 
composure and control was a magnificent attribute to our office because 
some of the cases were so incredibly sad or moving while some claimants 
were clearly crooks or thieves.  Her perceptive language skills facilitated 
ascertaining the genuine claimants from the liars and swindlers. 
 
One attribute it was my pleasure to discover unintentionally was 
[Applicant’s] extraordinary loyalty to the United States and the Coalition 
Forces.  One day while listening to her without her knowledge, I heard her 
tell each claimant that we paid on pay day to stop supporting the 
insurrection against the Americans and to tell their children to stop 
throwing stones at Americans.  This was an unsolicited act of loyalty to her 
country and the Coalition Forces. She was trying to change [Iraq] one 
claimant at a time. That act of concern for the Coalition Forces and for 
America’s fighting men and women provides a window into this woman’s 
heart of integrity and compassion. 
 
(Ex. D.) 
 
 On June 30, 2004, another officer for whom Applicant worked observed the 
following about her: 
 
[Applicant] successfully rises to meet the challenges of her job.  She 
efficiently and professionally deals with our largely male claimant 
population, many of whom ware hostile, indignant, or outraged over their 
car accidents raids, injuries, detention, or other traumatic events. Some 
claimants resist cooperating with her because she is female or because 
her dialect varies from their own.  She is kind and patient with older folks 
and children. Though she often finds the Iraqi tendency to respond to 
questions evasively and without specific detail frustrating, she persists and 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
adapts the questioning to obtain the information we need.  She exercises 
patience with our claimants even when under the stress that a long line of 
hot and impatient claimants creates. 
 
(Ex. E.) 
 
 Applicant found value in being of service to the Coalition Forces, and she took 
action to file an application to join the U.S. military. Then, after almost two years of 
service in Iraq, Applicant was injured when a suicide bomber self-detonated in the base 
mess hall as she was passing nearby.  In the confusion, she ran to get away from the 
explosion, and seriously injured her mouth and face when she hit the side of a bunker. 
She also received a wound when shrapnel pierced several bones in one of her feet.  
(Tr. 75-78.) 
 
 The extent of Applicant’s injuries was not immediately clear. She remained in 
Iraq for two more months. Her foot became infected, and she was evacuated to 
Germany, where military doctors advised amputation of the foot. Applicant elected 
instead to return to the United States for treatment. She underwent surgery for the 
shrapnel wound in 2005. As a result of her surgery, the bone did not knit correctly, and 
Applicant was scheduled for more surgery on her foot in April 2009. She wears dental 
braces to repair the damage done to her teeth and mouth when she hit the bunker. 
Because of her injuries and the required treatments, Applicant was unable to follow 
through on her plan to join the U.S. military. (Tr. 77-82.)   
   
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Egypt, as provided by 
Department Counsel from official documents of the United States government2: 
 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world and the second-most 
populous on the African Continent. It is a republic with a developing 
economy and has a strong executive. In October of 1981, Islamic 
extremists assassinated President al-Sadat; Hosni Mubarek, his Vice 
President, was elected to succeed him. President Mubarek has 
subsequently been confirmed by popular referendum for four more 6 year 
terms, most recently in 2005. 
 
 
2 The documents from which these facts are drawn are as follows: U.S. Department of State, Background 
Note: Egypt, dated March 2008 (11 pages); U.S. Department of State, Egypt Country Specific 
Information, dated December 15, 2008 (6 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on 
Terrorism: Chapter 2 - Country Reports: Middle East and North Africa Overview, dated April 30, 2008 (19 
pages); U.S. Department of State, Patterns of Global Terrorism, Middle East Overview, dated April 29, 
2004 (13 pages); U.S. Department of State, Patterns of Global Terrorism, Appendix B – Background 
Information on Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations, dated April 29, 2004 (26 pages); U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2008 Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices, 2008 Human Rights Report: Egypt, dated February 25, 2009 (30 pages), and CRS 
Report for Congress, Egypt: Background and U.S. Relations, Congressional Research Service, updated 
August 12, 2008 (31 pages). 
 
7 
 
 
The United States and Egypt enjoy a strong and friendly relationship 
based on shared mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability, 
strengthening trade relations, and promoting regional security. The 
Egyptian government receives substantial U.S. foreign aid.  In the last two 
years, the Mubarak regime has ‘cracked down on [its] domestic 
opponents.’  Many in the U.S. government have expressed concern about 
this crackdown and believe that the U.S. aid should be used to force the 
Egyptian government to ease its restrictions on the personal freedoms of 
its citizens, move to a more democratic government, and institute overdue 
economic reforms.  The Mubrak government faces increasing political 
unrest from various groups, both secular and religious, with its most 
threatening opposition coming from a radical Islamic group called the 
Muslim Brotherhood, which the government has banned as a political 
party. 
 
Egypt has aggressively pursued domestic terrorists and has instituted a 
‘zero tolerance’ policy on extremism.  Nevertheless, the threat of terrorism 
in Egypt remains and transnational terrorist groups and local terrorist 
groups pose threats in Egypt.  For example, the Egyptian Islamic Jihad 
[AKA, Al-Jihad] merged with Al-Qaida in June 2001, and in 2003, Egypt 
discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot against U.S. interests.  Further, 
between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly terrorist attacks 
causing many deaths and injuries, including U.S. citizens.  While the 
Egyptian government took measures against the perpetrators of the 2004 
and 2005 attacks, the April 2006 bombings reflect a persistent, indigenous 
threat of terror activities. 
 
The State Department notes that Egypt’s human rights record is poor and 
serious abuses continue in many areas.  Problems include: limitations on 
the right of citizens to change their government, torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, poor conditions in prisons, executive branch limits on 
an independent judiciary, political prisoners and detainees, and 
restrictions on freedom of press, assembly, and association, and religion, 
including Internet freedom. Torture occurs frequently in Egyptian detention 
centers. 
 
The Government of Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers 
to be Egyptian citizens.  Male dual nationals staying in Egypt for more 
than six months from the date of arrival and who have not completed 
military service are generally required to enlist in the armed forces.  
Persons with dual nationality who travel to Egypt on their Egyptian 
passports are normally treated as Egyptian citizens by the local 
government. The ability to provide U.S. consular assistance to those 
traveling on Egyptian passports is extremely limited. 
 
(HE 1, footnotes omitted.)  
 
8 
 
 
           Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Official U.S. government documents provided by Department Counsel 
emphasize that the United States and Egypt have a strong and positive relationship 
based on their mutual interest in maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.  The 
Egyptian government does not target U.S. citizens in order to obtain classified 
information from them.  However, despite the government of Egypt’s aggressive actions 
to put down domestic and international terrorist groups within its borders, the threat of 
terrorism remains.  Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered several serious terrorist 
attacks which caused considerable loss of life to civilians, including U.S. citizens. 
 
 Additionally, the U.S. government recognizes that Egypt has carried out human 
rights abuses against its own citizens. The government’s human rights abuses include   
torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, executive branch limits on an independent 
judiciary, and restrictions on freedom of press, assembly, association, and religion.    
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. Applicant denied the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.d., and she provided 
documentation to corroborate her statement that her sister is now a citizen and resident 
of the United States.  Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.d. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
The government provided substantial evidence to support its factual allegations 
that Applicant’s aged parents are citizens and residents of Egypt; that her mother has 
resident alien status in the United States and hopes to become a U.S. citizen; that  
Applicant’s two brothers are also citizens and residents of Egypt; and that Applicant has 
traveled to Egypt to visit her family five times since 1999, suggesting close and on-going 
contacts with them. These facts raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 3 AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”   
 
 Applicant admitted factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1.e., and the 
burden shifted to her to mitigate the resulting security concerns. Several mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s case.  If “the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,” 
then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might apply.  If “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” then AG ¶ 8(c) 
might apply.  
 
 Applicant is a dutiful daughter, and she has strong filial relationships with her 
father, who is a citizen and resident of Egypt, and with her mother who is a citizen of 
Egypt with U.S. resident alien status. She stays in contact with her parents and with her 
brothers in Egypt and is concerned about their well-being. Her relationship with her 
family members in Egypt is based on long-standing family ties of affection and 
obligation.  
 
 Egypt is a long-standing ally of the United States and cooperates with the United 
States in combating terrorism. The government of Egypt does target U.S. citizens to 
acquire protected information. The positions and activities of Applicant’s family 
members in Egypt do not involve the government or the military, and they would have 
no interest in acquiring protected information.  Only their physical presence in Egypt 
creates the potential that Applicant would confront a choice between their interests and 
the security interests of the United States. Thus, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application. 
 
 Applicant produced significant evidence establishing mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(b). Based on her relationship with and depth of loyalty to the United States, she can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. She has 
committed to a life as a U.S. citizen. She purchased a home and owns property in the 
 
3 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb.8, 2001). 
 
11 
 
 
United States. She does not own property or possess bank accounts in Egypt. 
Significantly, Applicant volunteered to assist the U.S. military in Iraq as an Arabic 
linguist and translator. For two years, while in Iraq, she willingly risked her life to support 
U.S. troops and U.S. interests. Several of her commanders attested to her honorable 
service to her country as an Arab linguist in Iraq. 
 
 While Applicant attempted to establish mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(c) by 
describing her contacts with her two brothers in Egypt as infrequent and only 
occasioned by inquiries to them about her parents’ health and well-being, she did not 
establish that her relationships with her brothers were casual.  While perhaps sporadic, 
her relationships with her brothers were on-going and familial.  Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) 
cannot be given full application. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Two 
circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. First, even though 
Egypt is an ally of the United States, it has committed serious human rights abuses 
against its own citizens. Second, four of Applicant’s immediate family members are 
citizens and residents of Egypt, raising the possibility that they could be subject to such 
abuses, which could raise security concerns for Applicant. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance.  Out of a sense of patriotism and love for the United States, Applicant joined 
U.S. troops in Iraq as an Arab-speaking linguist. She took part in high risk operations in 
support of the troops. Nothing in her record suggests that she has ever taken an action 
that would cause potential harm to the United States. She takes her loyalty to the United 
 
12 
 
 
                                           
States seriously. Those who witnessed her work as an Arab linguist and translator in 
Iraq assessed her as trustworthy, conscientious, responsible, and dedicated.   
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during her tenure with U.S. military 
forces in Iraq without any indication that she breached security policies or procedures. 
While this fact is not normally considered as a significant factor in granting a security 
clearance, DOHA’s Appeal Board has noted the following exception: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006).  
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See. e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006).  The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
(ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006.)  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s commendable 
performance as a linguist and translator in Iraq, I conclude Applicant has fully mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.4 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For 
all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
4 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Assuming that a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case.  
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is   
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
