 
 
 
 
1
                                                             
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04865 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On December 14, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline B and Guideline C. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 26, 2008, and waived her 
right to a hearing before an administrative judge. On January 28, 2009, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy the following day. Applicant received the FORM on February 
6, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted additional information to which Department 
Counsel had no objections. On May 7, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to another 
administrative judge and re-assigned it to me on May 15, 2009. I marked Applicant’s 
documents as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D and admitted them into the record. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Within the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Russia. Attached to the FORM are 
documents marked as Items I through X.  Applicant did not object to my consideration of 
those exhibits, as relating to Russia. Hence, the facts administratively noticed are 
limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out under the heading “The Russian 
Federation.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained 
under Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She was born and raised in Russia. In 1989, she 
earned a degree from a Russian university in transportation engineering. In 1993, she 
immigrated to the United States. In December of that year, she married her husband, a 
U.S. citizen. They have two children, born in the United States. In September 1998, she 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She attended a technical college in the United States 
from September 1999 to May 2005, and earned a degree in computer programming. In 
December 2007, she started her current position as an engineer with a defense 
contractor. (Item 4)  
 
 Applicant’s elderly parents were born in Russia and reside there. In October 
2008, Applicant filed Immigration Petition for Relative documents for both of her 
parents, seeking to bring them permanently to the United States. Their petitions were 
recently approved. (AE B, C and D) According to her April 27, 2009 letter, Applicant’s 
parents are in the process of selling their apartment in anticipation of moving to the 
United States. They are awaiting a scheduled interview at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow 
and a medical examination. She thinks they will arrive here in late summer. (AE A) 
Applicant has one sibling who was born in Russia and resides in the United States. She 
became a naturalized citizen in March 2009. (AE D) 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 In 2001, Applicant decided to return to Russia for a visit and applied for a 
Russian visa. The Russian government denied her request because she was born in 
Russia. Because the government makes it very difficult and expensive for Russian 
natives to travel to Russia on any passport other than a Russian one, she renewed her 
Russian passport in 2001. She subsequently renewed it in May 2006. It expires in May 
2011. Since leaving Russia in 1993, Applicant returned in December 2001, January 
2002 and October 2008 to see her parents. On each visit, she used a Russian passport 
that makes travel there more convenient. As soon as her parents arrive in the United 
States, she will destroy her Russian passport as she will no longer need it. She has not 
renounced her Russian citizenship to-date.  (AE D; Item 6 at 9)   
  
 Applicant wrote that “I consider myself an American citizen and have no ties to 
Russia such as financial, business or government interests. My only connection is 
through my elderly parents.” (Item 6 at 9) There is no derogatory information concerning 
Applicant’s police or financial records. She has never been fired from a job. She has no 
police record, has never used illegal drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related 
incident. (Item 4)  
 
The Russian Federation 
  
 The Russian Federation is a diverse and vast country. It is 1.8 times the size of 
the United States with a population of 142 million people. With the dissolution of the 
Soviet Union on August 24, 1991, the Russian Federation came into being as the 
successor nation, in part, to the Russian majority portions of the former Soviet Union. 
(Item I) The country is a very large nuclear superpower that has continued to develop 
economically, socially and politically since the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Recent 
events that have escalated tensions between Russia and the United States include the 
Russian incursion into internationally recognized sovereign Georgia territory by the 
Russian army, threats against Poland, suspicious poisonings and killings of journalists 
and other persons considered to be undesirable, and manipulation of energy resources 
to pressure NATO allies and other U.S. friendly countries, particularly former 
components of the Soviet Union, to bend them to Russian policies and national 
interests. Russia has an active, recent, and ongoing intelligence collection program 
targeting the United States. As of 2005, Russia and China were the most aggressive 
collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and accounted for the majority of 
such targeting. Russia has been a leader in industrial espionage against the United 
States since at least 1997, with no indication of abatement. Russian continues the 
espionage conducted by the former Soviet Union. Russia shares various technologies 
of security concern with other countries whose interests are contrary to those of the 
United States. Russian officials reportedly engage in human rights abuses, including 
abductions, torture, coerced confessions, and unlawful surveillance of citizens and 
visitors. (Item 2 V, VII and IX) 
 
The U.S. State Department succinctly describes the relationship between the 
United States and the Russian Federation as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
4
The United States and Russia share common interests on a broad range of 
issues, including counterterrorism and the drastic reduction of our strategic arsenals. 
Russia shares our basic goal of stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass 
destruction and the means to deliver them.  The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) 
program, launched in 1992 to facilitate dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction 
in the former Soviet Union, was renewed in 2006 until 2013. At the 2006 G8 Summit in 
St. Petersburg, the U.S. and Russia announced the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism to keep terrorists from acquiring nuclear materials. The United States is 
working with Russia to bring Iran’s nuclear programs into compliance with International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) rules and United Nations Security Council Resolutions 
1737, 1747, and 1803. Regarding North Korea and its development of nuclear weapons 
and missile delivery systems, Russia is a participant in the Six-Party Talks aimed at the 
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Russia also takes part in the Middle 
East Peace Process “Quartet” (along with the UN and the EU). Russia now interacts 
with NATO members as an equal through the NATO-Russian Council but without veto 
power over NATO decisions. During the past several years, Russia has intensified its 
efforts to combat trafficking in persons. The United States and Russia are cooperating 
in the fight against HIV/AIDS. (Item I) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
 
 
5
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:  
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, and then he or she may be prone 
to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
Applicant exercised dual citizenship three times when she chose to use her 
Russian passport to travel to Russia after becoming a U.S. citizen. Those facts are 
sufficient to raise a disqualification under AG ¶ 10(a)(1).   
After the Government raised a disqualification, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove mitigation. AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could 
 
 
 
 
6
potentially mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline, two of which may be 
applicable: 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant has not renounced or expressed a willingness to renounce her Russian 
citizenship at this time, which is necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 11(b).  Nor 
is she ready to surrender her Russian passport until her parents permanently move to 
the United States.  Hence, AG ¶ 11(e) is not applicable.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.1  
 
Applicant remains in communication with elderly parents, who are resident 
citizens of Russia, a country of significant concern for information security and 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
espionage against the United States. Since 1993, she has made three visits to Russia 
to see her elderly parents and has applied for their permanent resident status here, 
demonstrating the importance of this family relationship. Those connections are more 
likely to generate a heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion than most other 
countries. These facts meet the Government’s burden of production by raising the 
aforementioned disqualifying condition. These contacts and relationships shift the 
burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
  Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Given the nature of the Russian government and Applicant’s parent’s ongoing 
presence there, a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, or coercion 
remains a concern. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s contacts with her 
parents are more than casual given her attempt to sponsor their immigration to the 
United States, such that AG ¶ 8(c) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on her relationship with 
the United States, she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. She has lived in the United States since arriving in 1993.  Her husband 
and children are U.S. resident citizens. She has attended a U. S. college. She has a 
good position in the United States. Her sister is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing here. 
She is attempting to bring her parents to the United States to live. She considers herself 
an American and not a Russian. She does not have any financial or business 
connections with Russia.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
In cases involving foreign influence, the Appeal Board requires the whole person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given 
case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). In that same decision, the 
Appeal Board commended the whole person analysis in ISCR Case No. 03-02878 at 3 
(App. Bd. June 7, 2006), which provides: 
 
Applicant has been in the U.S. for twenty years and a naturalized citizen 
for seven. Her husband is also a naturalized citizen, and her children are 
U.S. citizens by birth. Her ties to these family members are stronger than 
her ties to family members in Taiwan. She has significant financial interest 
in the U.S. and none in Taiwan. She testified credibly that she takes her 
loyalty to the U.S. very seriously and would defend the interest of the U.S. 
Her supervisors and co-workers assess her as very loyal and trustworthy.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There are several countervailing, 
positive attributes to Applicant’s life as a U.S. citizen that weigh in favor of granting 
Applicant a security clearance. She is a mature person, who has lived in the United 
States for 15 years, and became a U.S. naturalized citizen in September 1998 when 
she swore allegiance to the United States.  Her husband and children are U.S. citizens. 
There is no evidence that she has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm 
to the United States. She has worked for a defense contractor for over a year. She 
asserted her pride of American citizenship. Because her immediate family members live 
in the United States, they are not vulnerable to coercion or exploitation by a foreign 
power. The realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress being placed 
on her elderly parents as they immigrate to the United States is low.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, 
Russia’s government is a rival of the United States and in some instances has not 
conformed to widely accepted norms of human rights. More importantly for security 
purposes, Russia is actively involved in espionage against the United States, and may 
attempt to use émigrés such as Applicant for espionage. Second, Applicant had 
numerous connections to Russia before coming to the United States in 1993. Following 
her birth, she spent her formative years there. She was educated at a Russian 
university. Third, her parents are resident citizens of Russia. Fourth, she maintains 
contact with them, especially while attempting to finalize their immigration plans. Fifth, 
she has refused to surrender her Russian passport or renounce her Russian citizenship 
until her parents move here, despite learning of the Government’s concern in 
September 2008.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence, but not those related to foreign 
preference, as she continues to hold a Russian passport. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                     
                 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
