 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09614 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), based on 20 delinquent debts totaling about 
$24,962, and Applicant’s failure to disclose the delinquent debts on her security 
clearance application. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 5, 2008. On 
December 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 13, 2009; answered it on January 14, 
2009; and requested a determination on the record. DOHA received the request on 
January 21, 2009. Department Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge on February 6, 2009 (Hearing Exhibit I), and was ready to proceed on February 
16, 2009. The case was assigned to me on February 17, 2009. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on February 18, 2009, scheduling the hearing for March 6, 2009. The hearing 
was cancelled on March 5, 2009, because of a contract dispute with the court reporting 
firm.  
 
On March 13, 2009, DOHA issued a second notice of hearing rescheduling the 
hearing for April 2, 2009. I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel also 
submitted a demonstrative exhibit summarizing his evidence, and it is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit II. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
E, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to hold the 
record open until April 17, 2009, to enable her to submit additional documentary 
evidence. She timely submitted AX F through HH, which were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX F through HH are attached to 
the record as Hearing Exhibit III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 15, 2009. 
The record closed on April 17, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.p-1.t, 2.a, and 2.b. At the hearing, she stated she did not intend to admit 
intentionally lying on her security clearance application (Tr. 11). For the purposes of this 
decision, I have treated her response as denying the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. 
Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old security officer employed by a federal contractor. She 
graduated from high school in June 1999, worked for various employers from January 
2000 to August 2005, worked as an independent contractor from August 2005 to August 
2006, and was unemployed from August 2006 until June 2008, when she began 
working for her current employer. She is unmarried, lives with her parents, and is 
financially responsible only for herself. She has never held a security clearance.  
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a personal financial 
statement (PFS) dated October 3, 2008, listing net monthly income of $1,241, expenses 
of $634, debt payments of $783, and a net monthly shortfall of $176. Her only housing 
expense is a monthly contribution of about $107 for utilities (GX 4 at 5). She 
commented on the bottom of her PFS that some of the debts were not hers but belong 
to family members. Applicant’s father and brother have the same name, and her name 
is a feminine version of her father’s name (Tr. 25-26). At the hearing, she testified her 
net monthly income is now about $1,400, not including overtime pay (Tr. 29). All the 
debts listed on her PFS were resolved after the PFS was submitted. 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling about $24,962, based on 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) dated October 15, 2008 (GX 2), and June 20, 
2008 (GX 3). With the exception of the student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t, all the debts 
had been delinquent for more than a year when she submitted her security clearance 
application. On her application, she answered “no” to question 28a, asking if she had 
been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts during the last seven years. She also 
answered “no” to question 28b, asking if she was currently more than 90 days 
delinquent on any debts. Finally, she answered “no” to question 27d, asking if she had 
any unpaid judgments against her in the last seven years. She did not disclose any of 
the debts and the unpaid judgment alleged in the SOR, even though she was aware of 
them. She testified she did not disclose the delinquent debts because she was afraid 
she would not be hired for her current job if she disclosed them (Tr. 57). She 
acknowledged them when she was interviewed by a security investigator in August 
2008 (GX 5). She testified her immediate supervisor and branch manager are generally 
aware of her financial problems, but she has not told them the details (Tr. 57-58). 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence regarding the delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Satellite Dish $832 Paid AX J; AX S; GX 2 at 1; GX 3 at 4 
1.b Tuition $813 Paid AX K; Tr. 27; GX 2 at 1; GX 3 at 12 
1.c Cell Phone $426 Unpaid Tr. 39; GX 2 at 1; GX 3 at 12 
1.d Computer $1,935 Unpaid Tr. 40; GX 2 at 2 
1.e Credit Card $19 Unpaid Tr. 41; GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 10 
1.f Tuition $5,820 Unpaid Tr. 41-43; GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 11 
1.g Tax Lien $595 Father’s debt  Tr. 43; GX 3 at 4 
1.h Credit Card 
(judgment) 
$2,568 Father’s debt AX I; Tr. 44; GX 3 at 4 
1.i Credit Card $1,209 Paid GX 4 at 6; AX D; Tr. 45; GX 3 at 5 
1.j Credit Card $1,801 Settled AX P; Tr. 47-48; GX 3 at 6 
1.k Credit Card $1,986 Mother’s debt AX N; AX O; GX 3 at 6 
1.l Credit Card $1,521 Father’s debt AX H; GX 3 at 6 
1.m Cell Phone $314 Same as 1.q Tr. 50; GX 3 at 7 
1.n Cell Phone $1,081 Brother’s debt Tr. 51; GX 3 at 8 
1.o Tuition $1,968 Brother’s debt AX L; GX 3 at 8 
1.p Credit Card $417 Unpaid Tr. 52; GX 3 at 9 
1.q Cell Phone $197 Paid AX HH; Tr. 50-51; GX 3 at 13 
1.r Cell Phone $583 Unpaid Tr. 53; GX 3 at 13 
1.s Medical Bill $50 Unpaid Tr. 53; GX 3 at 14 
1.t Student Loan $827 Brother’s debt AX M; Tr. 54; GX 3 at 21 
 
 Applicant forfeited a scholarship and incurred the tuition debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b by failing to complete the classes (Tr. 37). She incurred the tuition debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f believing she would receive financial aid, but she dropped out and was billed 
 
4 
 
 
for the tuition (Tr. 41-42). She attributed her other delinquent debts to periods of 
unemployment. However, her credit reports reflect that the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c-1.f, 1.i, 1.m, 1.n., 1.p, and 1.q became delinquent before she became 
unemployed in August 2006. 
 
 Applicant paid the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j two months after she was 
questioned about her debts by a security investigator (AX P and W). She paid the 
delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.i, and 1.q after she received the notice of 
hearing (AX D, J, K, P, S, and HH). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
5 
 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 20 delinquent debts totaling about $24,962. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG 
¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 
19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) 
is raised when there is Aconsistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 
19(a), (c), and (e), shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
 
6 
 
 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
not the result of unusual circumstances, and cast doubt on her good judgment. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s unemployment from August 2006 to 
June 2008 was beyond her control. Nevertheless, I conclude this mitigating condition is 
not fully established because many of her debts became delinquent while she was still 
employed. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant has resolved the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, and 1.q. Accordingly, I conclude this mitigating condition is 
established for those debts. 
  
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
established that seven debts were incurred by family members and were erroneously 
reported on her CBRs. Accordingly, I conclude this mitigating condition is established 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.t. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified her security clearance application by 
answering “no” to three questions about her financial history and failing to disclose her 
delinquent debts and an unpaid judgment. The concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
 
7 
 
 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 The unpaid judgment was entered against Applicant’s father and was not her 
responsibility, but she admitted she intentionally concealed her own delinquent debts 
for fear of not being hired. Her admission raises AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
made no effort to correct the omissions until she was confronted with the evidence. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s falsifications were 
not minor, because candor is essential in security matters. Although her conduct was 
not alleged under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), I note that intentional omission of 
relevant and material information on her security clearance application was a violation 
of 10 U.S.C. § 1001, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years. 
Her falsifications were recent, pertained to her current application for a clearance, and 
did not occur under “unique circumstances.” The record reflects no other falsifications, 
but her lack of candor on her security clearance applicant casts doubt on her reliability 
and trustworthiness. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). Applicant receives some credit under this 
mitigating condition because she disclosed her financial problems to her superior, albeit 
in general terms. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is relatively young and inexperienced, but she demonstrated 
considerable sophistication in challenging erroneous entries on her CBRs and 
negotiating settlements of some of her delinquent debts. She incurred many of her 
delinquent debts by overspending while gainfully employed. She deserves credit for 
making a good start toward financial stability, but her settlement of five delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR did not occur until after she was questioned about them. Four of the 
five were not paid until she received the notice of hearing.  
 
 I have considered the Appeal Board decisions recognizing that an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged 
in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need 
only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There 
also is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. Id. On the other hand, I have considered Applicant’s pattern of enrolling in college 
classes and then dropping out, her long record of financial neglect, and her failure to 
begin resolving her delinquent debts until she realized her clearance and her job were 
at risk. Based on this record, I am not convinced she will continue resolving her 
delinquent debts after she is relieved of the pressure of obtaining a clearance.  
 
 Separate and apart from her financial situation, Applicant’s lack of candor on her 
security clearance application raises serious doubts about her reliability and 
trustworthiness. “An applicant who deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid 
answers to the government in connection with a security clearance investigation or 
adjudication interferes with the integrity of the industrial security program.@ ISCR Case 
No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
 
9 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.o:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
