                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-07998 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg T. Rinckey, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s most recent steroid use was in 2005. Security concerns related to 
drug involvement are mitigated. He deliberately failed to fully disclose the extent of his 
steroid use on his 2007 security clearance application. He failed to mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as a security clearance application (2007 
SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On January 2, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), J 
(Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct) (GE 11). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On February 7, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (GE 11). 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 8, 2009, and the case was assigned 
to me on April 14, 2009. At the hearing held on May 1, 2009, Department Counsel 
offered seven exhibits (GE 1-7) (Transcript (Tr.) 18-19). There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-7 (Tr. 19). Applicant did not provide any exhibits (Tr. 7). I also admitted a 
hearing notice, an amended hearing notice, the SOR, a notice of appearance, and 
Applicant’s SOR response (GE 8-12). I received the transcript on May 18, 2009.   
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel elected not to present evidence to support SOR ¶ 2, which 
alleged Applicant’s steroid use constituted criminal conduct under Guideline J (Tr. 11-
12). Applicant’s counsel did not object to my proposal to find “For Applicant” (Tr. 12), 
and I have done so without addressing Guideline J in my Analysis.1   
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.b to 
1.e and denied partial or full culpability for the remaining SOR allegations (GE 12). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old cost analyst for a defense contractor (Tr. 46). Applicant 
graduated from high school in 1999 and joined the Marine Corps on July 6, 1999 (Tr. 
33, 46). His specialty in the Marine Corps was electrical equipment repairman (Tr. 46). 
He is married and has two stepchildren, ages 15 and 17 (Tr. 40, 66). His employment 
for the contractor sponsoring his clearance involved supervision of 40 foreign nationals, 
who were providing security in Iraq, as well as providing personal security for individuals 
in Iraq (Tr. 42). The contract in Iraq ended in April 2009 and Applicant returned to the 
United States, where he obtained temporary employment with another government 
contractor (Tr. 43).   
 
1Three other procedural matters merit brief mention. Applicant’s sponsor for his clearance 
continued to sponsor his security clearance, even though he began new employment shortly before his 
hearing (Tr. 31-32, 43, 69-70). Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement for the start of the hearing 
(Tr. 12-13; GE 8, 9). I disclosed I was acquainted with a corporate officer at the corporation sponsoring 
Applicant’s security clearance (Tr. 70). The parties did not object to my continuation as administrative 
judge in this case (Tr. 70-71).  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
On August 27, 2004, the Department of the Navy Central Adjudication Facility 
(DON CAF) approved a conditional Top Secret clearance for Applicant (GE 6). The 
DON CAF warned Applicant to “avoid any personal or criminal conduct involving 
questionable judgment or unreliability” (GE 6).  
 
Applicant has never been charged with any felony, firearms or explosives offense 
(GE 1). He has not been charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type, non-traffic-
related offenses in the last seven years (GE 1). In the last seven years, he has not had 
any debts delinquent over 180 days, bankruptcy petitions, unpaid judgments, or unpaid 
liens (GE 1). 
 
Applicant’s DD Form 214 listed the following ribbons and awards: Marine Corps 
Good Conduct Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, National Defense 
Service Medal, Navy and Marine Corps Overseas Service Ribbon, Sea Service 
Deployment Ribbon, Navy Unit Commendation, Secretary of the Navy Letter of 
Commendation, Letter of Appreciation (2d award), Meritorious Mast (3d award), and 
Certificate of Appreciation.  
 
Steroid Possession and Use 
 
 While Applicant was assigned to be a security guard at an overseas embassy, he 
used steroids for one cycle3 during the period from about September 2002 to May 2003 
(SOR ¶ 1.a; Tr. 36; GE 12). He was using steroids with about four other U.S. Marines 
(Tr. 53). A cycle is a four-to-12 week period of frequent steroid injections during about 
half of the cycle (Tr. 35, 49-50, 52). He used steroids to have larger muscle mass and to 
improve his physical fitness test scores (Tr. 53). The remainder of the cycle has less 
frequent or no steroid use (Tr. 35). Applicant had a Department of Defense (DoD) 
security clearance at the time he was using steroids in 2002-2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Tr. 47-
48; GE 12).  
 
Applicant used steroids over about a six-week period from March 2005 to April 
2005 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Tr. 50; GE 12). On May 25, 2005, Applicant received nonjudicial 
punishment for use of steroids (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 12). He received a reduction in grade to 
Lance Corporal (E-3), restriction and extra duty for 45 days, and forfeiture of one half of 
one month’s pay for one month (SOR ¶ 1.d; Tr. 39-40; GE 3, 4, 12). His DoD-issued 
security clearance was in effect when he used steroids in 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 12).   
 
Applicant has not received any drug counseling (Tr. 54). Applicant does not 
currently associate with drug users (Tr. 45). He believes his steroid use was wrongful, 
and accepted responsibility for this misconduct (Tr. 63). Applicant denied illegal drug 
use after his steroid use in 2005 (Tr. 40). He has changed because of his marriage and 
recognition that he is responsible for two stepchildren (Tr. 40). Bible study is very 
important to Applicant (Tr. 44-45).  
 
 
 
3 Applicant used steroids for one cycle in 2002-2003 and one cycle in 2005 (Tr. 36, 50; GE 12).    
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Falsification of 2007 Security Clearance Application 
 
On September 13, 2007, Applicant signed his SF 86 (SOR ¶ 3.a; Tr. 55; GE 1). 
On his 2007 SF 86 he responded, “Yes” to Sections 24a and 24b, which ask: 
 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity  
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have 
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, 
cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, 
heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs?    
 
b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as 
a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety? 
 
On his 2007 SF 86, he explained that from April 2005 to August 2005 he used 
Steroids once. He specifically noted, “Used [steroids] one time expirementally (sic) and 
will NOT ever use again (emphasis added).” He noted that he used marijuana one time 
in January 1999 when he was a senior in high school (GE 1).4  
 
In the Additional Comments section of the 2007 SF 86, Applicant elaborated on 
his drug use stating, ”I used Steroids one time while I was in the Marine Corps and have 
never touched or wanted to use it again. I used marijuana a few times in my Senior year 
of High School, and I have refrained from using since, seeing as I joined the Marines 
immediately after High School (emphasis added)” (GE 1 at § 24).  
 
On May 25, 2005, a Marine Corps investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
steroid use (GE 5).5 Applicant signed a sworn statement and disclosed that he used 
steroids and lifted weights for six months while on an overseas assignment to embassy 
duty (GE 5 at 2). He gained about 60 pounds over those six months (GE 5 at 2). He 
used steroids again from March 2005 to April 16, 2005 (GE 5 at 2). He injected steroids 
once every three days at first, then twice every two days, then twice every day and then 
tapered off to every third day (GE 5 at 2). He was using Testosterone Propionate, Deca-
Durabolin, Sustanon, and Dianabol” (GE 5 at 3). 
 
On October 27, 2008, in response to two DOHA interrogatories about his most 
recent marijuana use, Applicant said he, used marijuana three or four times from 
                                            
4The question sought drug use in the last seven years, and his marijuana use was more than 
seven years previously (Tr. 59). 
 
5Applicant falsely told the investigator that no other Marines in his unit were using steroids (Tr. 
61). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
January 1999 to June 1999 (GE 2 at 2). He used steroids during two cycles from 
September 2002 to May 2003 (GE 2 at 2). He noted that he “decided to stop using 
steroids after his last cycle. I decided to stop using steroids because I became more 
aware of the health dangers, and my family has a history of heart problems, so I 
decided that I want to live as long as possible.” (GE 2 at 2). Applicant said his DOHA 
interrogatory, rather than his 2001 and 2007 security clearance applications, had 
accurate information about the number of his marijuana uses in high school (Tr. 60).6  
 
At his hearing Applicant emphasized that he was incorrect in his description of 
his steroid use on his 2007 SF 86, and he explained why he did not disclose his 2002-
2003 steroid use: 
 
I’m honestly not sure. I guess I might have been in a hurry, and I was just 
trying to get it done. But if you look at the explanation, later, I did say that I 
did use steroids two cycles (referring to the responses on the DOHA 
interrogatories). 
 
*  *  * 
 
Like I said, I must have just been going through it real quickly, and just 
wasn’t paying attention to detail. I just completely forgot about the one in 
2002. I hadn’t been charged for it, or anything like that. So it is not 
something that is in the forefront of my mind, where I’m constantly thinking 
about it. 
 
(Tr. 37, 57, 63). When he said he used steroids “once” he meant he used steroids 
multiple times, but it was only one cycle (Tr. 61-62). He noted, however, that on the 
DOHA interrogatories he disclosed the 2002-2003 steroid use, but not the 2005 steroid 
use (Tr. 38). He attributed the failure to accurately disclose his steroid use on his DOHA 
interrogatories to “an oversight” (Tr. 38-39) and “inattention to detail” (Tr. 58). 
  
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor (S) served in the Marine Corps for eight years and left 
active duty as a Staff Sergeant (Tr. 23). S was discharged from the Marine Corps in 
October 2001 with an Honorable Discharge (Tr. 23). S held a Top Secret clearance (Tr. 
24). S has worked in Information Technology for his current employer for six years (Tr. 
24).  S hired Applicant as an electronics technician in March 2007 (Tr. 22, 24). Applicant 
worked for his firm until May 2008 (Tr. 25). S has met Applicant’s wife and children, and 
they have been to each other’s residences (Tr. 27-28). S observed and supervised 
Applicant’s work performance on a daily basis (Tr. 25). Applicant received an 
outstanding performance rating (Tr. 25). Applicant’s behavior was excellent (Tr. 25-26). 
 
 
6 He attributed his decision not to disclose accurate information about his marijuana use on his 
2001 security clearance application to advice from his recruiter (Tr. 60).   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
S rehired Applicant in April 2009 (Tr. 26-27). Applicant’s employment on this current 
project requires a security clearance (Tr. 29-31).  
 
Applicant’s spouse met him in 2005, and they married in October 2005 (Tr. 66). 
She has never known her husband to use illegal drugs (Tr. 67). He does not associate 
with individuals who use illegal drugs (Tr. 67). Applicant is a good husband and father to 
her children (Tr. 68). The family missed Applicant when he was in Iraq (Tr. 68). 
Applicant is honest and trustworthy (Tr. 68).  
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any 
drug abuse,”7 “(c) illegal drug possession or sale or distribution,” and “(g) any illegal 
drug use after being granted a security clearance.”8 
 
7AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
8 Applicant’s steroid use on active duty violated Article 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 912a. See United States v. Commander, 39 M.J. 972, 975-977 (A.F.C.M.R. 1994) 
(noting possession of Deca-Durabolin among other anabolic steroids violated Article 112a, UCMJ, as this 
substance was listed as a Schedule III controlled substance). 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
    AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c) and 25(g) apply. These disqualifying conditions apply 
because Applicant used and possessed steroids.9 He fully disclosed his drug abuse in 
his SOR response and at his hearing. He possessed anabolic steroids before he used 
them. Applicant held a security clearance at the time he used anabolic steroids. The 
other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
 
9AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Title 21 U.S.C. § 812(c) contains Schedules I through V of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 (as 
amended). Title 21 U.S.C. § 802(41)(A) defines the term "anabolic steroid" to mean “any drug or 
hormonal substance, chemically and pharmacologically related to testosterone (other than estrogens, 
progestins, corticosteroids, and dehydroepiandrosterone),” and then the statute lists a variety of specific 
chemical substances. Anabolic steroids are a Schedule (Sch.) III controlled substance. See Sch. III(e).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”10 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in May 2005, about four years 
prior to his hearing. His overall illegal drug use was relatively brief, and involved two 
cycles of anabolic use and a few marijuana uses in high school. The absence of 
evidence of more recent or extensive drug use, and his promise not to use illegal drugs 
in the future eliminates doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.11   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has disassociated from his drug-using associates and 
contacts. He has broken or reduced the prevalence of his patterns of drug abuse, and 
he has changed his own life with respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug 
abuse for about four years. However, he did not provide “a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
11In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. The 
steroids were never lawfully prescribed for him. He did not satisfactorily complete a 
prescribed drug treatment program. Moreover, he did not provide proof of a “favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional” as required in AG ¶ 26(d). 
  
In sum, Applicant ended his relatively isolated drug abuse in May 2005, about 
four years ago.12 His illegal drug use is not recent. The motivations to stop using illegal 
drugs are evident. He understands the adverse results from drug abuse.13  He promised 
not to use illegal drugs in the future. Drug involvement security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
12The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative 
judge considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were 
mitigated. ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). In ISCR Case No. 07-
03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008), the Appeal Board explained it is the overall conduct that determines 
whether a clearance should be granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole Person Concept at pages 
13-14, infra.  
 
13Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.14 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his steroid use from September 2002 to May 2003 on 
his 2007 SF 86 (SOR ¶ 3.a). Even more egregiously, he typed two false statements into 
the comment sections of his 2007 SF 86. He stated he, “Used [steroids] one time 
expirementally (sic) and will NOT ever use again (emphasis added).” And he stated, ”I 
used Steroids one time while I was in the Marine Corps and have never touched or 
wanted to use it again.” AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b) and 16(d)(3) all apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
                                            
14The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e), “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior” and “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” partially apply to mitigate 
his steroid use and his falsification of his 2007 SF 86. Security officials are well aware of 
Applicant’s problems. Applicant has taken the positive step of disclosure, eliminating 
any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress with respect to this misconduct. 
I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid public disclosure 
of these problems.  
 
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole person analysis for admitting 
his steroid use in 2002-2003 and in 2005, when he was under investigation in May 2005 
for steroid use. He re-admitted his steroid use during these two periods at his hearing 
and in his SOR response. I found Applicant’s admissions about his steroid use at his 
hearing and in his SOR response to be credible. However, the personal conduct 
concerns pertaining to Applicant’s falsification of his 2007 security clearance application 
(SOR ¶ 3.a) about the extent of his steroid use cannot be mitigated at this time because 
it is too serious and too recent. He denied that he deliberately falsified his 2007 security 
clearance application and attributes the false information to lack of attention to detail, 
inadvertence, or oversight. I do not find these explanations to be credible. He 
affirmatively added one-time steroid use to the comments on his 2007 SF 86. Moreover, 
his 2007 SF 86, when viewed in its entirety, does show careful, attention to detail with 
respect to his traffic fines and employment. I believe he deliberately understated his 
steroid use on his 2007 SF 86.   
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral change; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he used marijuana and steroids. He honorably 
served his country as a U.S. Marine for six years, rising to the rank of corporal. He 
showed he has the ability to abstain from illegal drug use for lengthy periods of time. In 
his SOR response and at his hearing, he admitted his history of illegal drug use. He 
knows the consequences of drug abuse. Applicant contributes to his company and the 
Department of Defense. He served in Iraq as a contractor employee, facing danger and 
hardship on behalf of the United States. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he 
would intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. His supervisors evidently 
support him or he would not have been able to retain his employment after his security 
clearance was called into question. His supervisor lauds his hard work and dedication. I 
am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from drug use, and avoids future offenses he 
will eventually have future potential for access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant used steroids in the period 2002—2003 and in 2005 for a total of 
two cycles. His decisions to possess and use steroids (each time he injected the 
substance into his body was a separate decision about whether to violate the law) were 
knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. Applicant failed to fully disclose his steroid 
use on his 2007 SF 86. In the 2002—2003 timeframe, he used steroids for about six 
months and gained about 60 pounds, going from 160 pounds to 220 pounds. This is 
more than a brief experimental use of steroids. Then in 2005, he used steroids again, 
was questioned by investigators, and disciplined under the UCMJ for steroid use. These 
events are too important to inadvertently or accidently fail to include, while adding to the 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
comments that his steroid use was a one-time event. He was sufficiently mature to be 
fully responsible for his conduct. These offenses show a serious lack of judgment and a 
failure to abide by the law. Such judgment lapses are material in the context of security 
requirements. His misconduct raises a serious security concern, and a security 
clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct; however, he has fully 
mitigated drug involvement primarily because his illegal drug use is not recent. His 
criminal conduct is mitigated because the government did not present any evidence 
relating to the applicability of this guideline.     
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”15 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
15See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
