 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09806 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but has not mitigated 
the concerns raised under the Financial Considerations guideline. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
On December 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 23, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on March 4, 2009, and reassigned to me on March 11, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on March 16, 2009, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 9, 
2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through 
E, which were received without objection. The record was held open until April 17, 2009, 
for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted seven pages of 
documents, which were marked AE F through K, and admitted without objection. 
Appellant requested an additional 30-day extension to submit information. Department 
Counsel did not object to an extension through May 8, 2009. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I orally granted an extension to May 8, 
2009. Applicant submitted an additional four pages of documents, which were marked 
AE L through O, and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s second 
memorandum is marked HE II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
April 17, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since April 2008. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 
1999 to 2005. He deployed to Iraq for about 14 months in 2004 and 2005. He received 
a General Under Honorable Conditions Discharge in 2005. He attended college, but did 
not obtain a degree. He was married from 2001 until his divorce in 2002. He married 
again in 2004, but is separated. He has two children, ages nine and one, and a seven-
year-old stepchild. Appellant has custody of his two children. He also had a six-year-old 
child, but he and the mother relinquished their parental rights and the child was adopted 
by a member of the mother’s family.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted owing all the debts, with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 
1.h, and 1.i, which he denied. The 14 debts that Applicant admitted he owed total 
$22,475.  
 
 Applicant had some financial issues while he was in the Army, but he attributed 
most of his problems to unemployment, under-employment, and the failure of his 
business after he was discharged from the Army. Applicant was discharged from the 
Army after he smoked marijuana and tested positive on a drug screening test.2   
 
 A state tax lien of $1,234 was filed against Applicant in August 2007, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. He admitted he owed the money. He stated it resulted from when he was 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 42-43, 73-76; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22, 46; GE 1. Applicant’s marijuana use was not alleged as an allegation in the SOR 
and will not be used for disqualification purposes. It will be considered for the impact it had on his 
finances and in the application of mitigating conditions. Because Applicant listed the drug use on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions, it will also be considered as circumstantial evidence on 
whether he intentionally falsified the Questionnaire by omitting financial information.  
 
3 
 
self-employed and he went out of business because of lack of customers. He has not 
made any payments on this debt.3 
 
 Applicant paid the following debts: SOR ¶ 1.b, a $345 debt to a collection 
company on behalf of a telephone services provider, was paid on April 16, 2009. SOR 
¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, two debts totaling $209 to a collection company on behalf of a 
department store, were paid on May 7, 2009. SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, Applicant paid $512 
on April 16, 2009 to a collection company on behalf of a telecommunications company. 
SOR ¶ 1.p, a $229 debt to a video store was paid on April 16, 2009. Applicant disputed 
owing the $54 debt for a returned check to a supermarket chain, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. He stated that he has not lived in the geographic area where the chain is located, 
but his ex-wife lived in that area. He thought she could have taken one of his checks 
without his knowledge. He paid the debt anyway on May 7, 2009.4    
 
 Applicant admitted owing the delinquent debt of $1,103 to a collection company 
on behalf of a cable television provider, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant testified that 
this debt was for a cable box that was not returned when he moved. He stated his wife 
packed the box and it was placed in storage. After the hearing, Applicant submitted a 
receipt from the cable company dated April 16, 2009, showing that the issued 
equipment was returned and he had a zero balance.5   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k allege delinquent child support debts of $9,620 and $2,765. 
Applicant admitted that he was delinquent on the child support he owed for the six-year-
old child that he eventually gave up for adoption. He stated that paternity was not 
determined until the child was about two years old, and then he was ordered to pay the 
arrears on the support owed since the child was born. He also indicated that he fell 
behind on the payments after he was discharged from the Army. His pay was garnished 
to pay the child support. His child support obligations ended when he relinquished his 
parental rights through adoption. His pay continues to be garnished about $40 every 
two weeks to pay the arrears. He stated that his income tax refunds have also been 
seized to pay the arrears. He stated that the amount of the arrears is now about $9,000. 
He did not submit any documentation to show the actual arrears.6 
 
 Applicant denied that he owed $1,369 on a delinquent military exchange credit 
card account, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He admitted he had an exchange credit card, 
but thought he paid the debt. He thought his income tax refund may have been seized 
to pay the debt. He also denied owing the delinquent debt of $2,817 to Defense Finance 
and Accounting Service (DFAS), as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. Both debts are listed on the 
credit reports of June 28, 2008 and December 1, 2008. The DFAS debt is listed as a 
“Government Overpayment.” Applicant stated that he did not remember ever being 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 56-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE B-D, G, H, J, K, M-O. 
 
5 Tr. at 47-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE I. 
 
6 Tr. at 23-30, 72-73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE E. 
 
 
4 
 
overpaid by the Government. He did not submit any documentation about the debts. He 
stated that he had difficulty in contacting the correct individuals at the exchange and at 
DFAS. He works on a military installation, but he indicated that he was told by the 
personnel on the installation that they could not assist him because he was not in the 
military.7  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the remaining five delinquent debts which total $6,624 
and are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.m, 1.o, 1.q, and 1.r. No payments have been made on 
any of these debts, but he stated that he intends to pay all his delinquent debts. He is 
focused on not accruing new delinquent debts and paying the ones he has one-by-one. 
He attempted to obtain a debt consolidation loan but he was told that his debts were not 
high enough to qualify for a loan. He has not received formal financial counseling, but 
his supervisor has assisted him in formulating a budget.8   
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
which he certified as true on May 30, 2008. He listed his marijuana use under the 
pertinent question. He answered “No” to Question 27c, which asked “In the last 7 years, 
have you had a lien placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or other 
debt(s)?” He also answered “No” to Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the last 7 
years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant stated that he did not understand 
the questions.9 After considering all the evidence, Applicant’s demeanor, and his 
communication skills, I find that he did not intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from his supervisor. The supervisor wrote that 
Applicant is a valued employee who is professional, exceptionally reliable, and 
maintains a high level of integrity. He places Applicant in a supervisory position when he 
is absent. Applicant is held in high regard at all levels of their organization.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 50-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 23, 47-50, 70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE I. 
 
9 Tr. at 21-23, 69-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
10 AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes the largest debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues are 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. He attributes his financial problems to 
unemployment, under-employment, and the failure of his business after he was 
discharged from the Army. However, several of the debts were accrued before he was 
discharged. He was discharged because he smoked marijuana and was caught on a 
drug screening test. His discharge was not an event that was beyond his control. AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant’s marijuana use was not responsible conduct. He did not begin to act 
 
7 
 
responsibly toward his delinquent debts until recently. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
Almost all the payments on his delinquent debts have been made within the last 40 
days. Those payments constitute a good start on paying his debt. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
applicable as a good-faith effort to repay those creditors. The payments are insufficient 
to qualify as a good-faith effort to repay all his overdue creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable to his other debts. He has not received formal financial counseling. 
Applicant’s financial situation is headed in the right direction, but there are not yet clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant denied owing four debts. He paid two of the debts, so they are no 
longer a concern. He denied owing DFAS and the military exchange. He did not submit 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute. His testimony on the debts is 
not persuasive. AG ¶ 20(e) provides minimal mitigation for those two debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following mitigating condition is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant omitted some financial information from his Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions; however, as discussed above, it was not a deliberate omission. AG ¶ 
16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered the positive aspects of Applicant’s military service, including his service in 
Iraq. Some of his financial problems can be traced to unemployment, under-
employment, and the failure of his business after he was discharged from the Army. 
However, those problems were of his own making. He is highly regarded by his 
employer and he has begun to behave responsibly by addressing his delinquent debts. 
However, he still has a large amount of delinquent debts. His payments are a good 
start, but are insufficient at this time to mitigate security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns, but has not mitigated 
the concerns raised under the Financial Considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q-1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
