                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 08-03130 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
On October 31, 2007, Applicant signed a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, 
Standard Form (SF) 86. The application (Item 6) was submitted on November 14, 2007 
to request a security clearance. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On June 12, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Item 1), that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
n the record. 
                                                          
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on July 15, 2008 (Item 2). She responded on July 
30, 2008, and requested a decision without a hearing (Item 3). Her Answer was 
incomplete, and on August 6, 2008, DOHA requested that she submit a complete 
response (Item 4). Applicant forwarded a second Answer, dated August 25, 2008 (Item 
5). In her second Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations except 1.e.2 On 
February 18, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials 
(FORM)3 in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Other than the 
documents already identified, the FORM contained Applicant's response to DOHA 
interrogatories (Item 7), and three credit bureau reports (Items 8, 9 and 10). Applicant 
was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to file a response, but did not 
respond. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009, for an administrative decision 
based o
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 30 years old, is employed by a defense contractor. According to 
information she provided in her security clearance application, she is unmarried, and 
has a nine-year-old son and a two-year-old daughter. The application contained no 
information on her educational background. Applicant worked as a customer service 
representative from 1998 to 2001, and a collections representative for a telephone 
company from 2001 to 2003. She also was employed as an invoicing representative for 
one year, and a warehouseman for two years from 2004 to 2006. She held a position for 
approximately seven months in 2007 as a shipping and receiving clerk, before starting 
her current employment as an inventory specialist in October 2007. Applicant was 
unemployed for six months in 2003 (Item 6).  
 
 Applicant’s gross monthly income includes earnings of $2,960, and child support 
of $276, for a total of $3,236. After deductions of $1,830, her net monthly income is 
$2,107. Appellant's monthly expenses are $2,415. This figure does not include her rent 
of $875, because her boyfriend now pays their mortgage (Items 3; 7). After expenses, 
Applicant's monthly net remainder is negative $307. When Applicant’s car payment of 
$533 is deducted, her monthly expenses exceed her income by approximately $841 
2  Applicant attached to her Answer four documents supporting her claim that she paid several alleged 
debts. I will identify these documents as Answer document 1 (re allegation 1.e.); Answer document 2 (re 
allegation 1.a.); Answer document 3 (re allegation 1.h.); and Answer document 4 (not related to debts 
alleged in the SOR). 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 10 documents (Items 1 - 10) proffered 
in support of the government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
(Item 7). Applicant noted that she lives “with my boyfriend and the mortgage is paid by 
him as well as the water. We have a baby together so he helps with the bills” (Item 3). 
She did not indicate how much he contributes to her financial support. 
 
 The eleven SOR debts amount to $9,726. Applicant provided evidence that she 
satisfied five of the alleged debts:  
 
• 1.b. (medical debt of $133, see Answer document 2) 
• 1.e. (cable debt of $172; see Answer document 1) 
• 1.h. (medical debt of $154; see Item 7 and Answer document 3) 
• 1.i. (collection debt of $1,119; confirmation number X4A2456259) 
• 1.j. (collection debt of $788; confirmation number 2698291) 
 
The paid debts total $2,366. When these debts are excluded from the SOR total, 
Applicant's unpaid debt amounts to $7,360. 
 
 Applicant's debts became delinquent between 2003 and 2007 (Item 10). 
However, her 2009 credit bureau report shows medical debts totaling approximately 
$4,246 that did not appear on her earlier credit bureau reports. It also indicates that, 
compared to the amounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant's  debt listed at allegation 1.f. 
has increased by more than $300, and the debt alleged at 1.k. has increased by 
approximately $70 (Items 8 through 10). 
 
 Applicant states in her Answer that she is a hard worker and has received letters 
of appreciation and recognition from her employers. She did not submit performance 
evaluations or character references. Applicant also noted that she does not “have a 
criminal background and haven’t been in any trouble.” Applicant noted in her Answers, 
without further explanation, that “I may have not made the best choice when I was 
younger, but I’m older and wiser now.” She also stated that, “I know I’m the one who 
made the mistakes and I will have to suffer the consequences.” (Item 5). Applicant did 
not indicate that she experienced major events that affected her ability to pay her debts 
such as medical emergencies, divorce or unexpected financial setbacks. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant has been accruing 
delinquencies since 2003. She currently owes past-due debt of $7,360, and new debt of 
$4,246. Her six-year history of failing to meet her financial obligations supports 
application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, and did not occur in the distant past, 
because many of them are still delinquent. In addition, Applicant made no effort 
between 2003 and 2007 to deal with her overdue debts. Finally, the new debts that 
have appeared on her most recent credit bureau report indicate that delinquencies are 
likely to recur in the future. Her conduct casts doubt on her reliability and good 
judgment, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 It is commendable that Applicant paid five of the SOR debts. But it must be noted 
that two were paid in April 2008, around the time Applicant received the DOHA 
Interrogatories, and two were paid in August 2008, after she had received the SOR. The 
timing of the payments raises the question as to whether they were simply a response 
to the security process, rather than a good-faith effort. In addition, the greater part of 
Applicant's delinquent debt remains outstanding. Her recent credit bureau report shows 
that additional debts have become delinquent within the past few months, after the 
security process was underway. The record includes no evidence that Applicant has a 
plan in place to resolve either the remaining SOR debts or the new delinquencies. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. I find against the Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Applicant has accrued more than $9,000 in delinquencies since 2003. The 
record contains no evidence that, between 2003 and 2007, she took any steps to 
resolve it. In 2008, after Applicant received the DOHA Interrogatories, she paid more 
than $2,000. While it is commendable that she has resolved some portion of her debt, 
the fact that she did not make an effort to resolve her debts until prodded by the security 
clearance process raises doubts about her judgment and reliability. Given the fact that 
she has a substantial amount of delinquent debt remaining, and that she has accrued 
new debt, I cannot confidently predict that Applicant’s financial problems will be 
resolved. A fair and common-sense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has not satisfied the doubts 
about her ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests. Because protection 
of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be 
resolved in favor of the government.8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:.    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. – 1.d.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e.    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.g.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h. – 1.j.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.k. – 1.l.   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
