  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-03459 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 21 past due, charged off, or collection accounts totaling in excess 
of $46,000. There is no evidence of any payment on the obligations. Applicant has 
failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s trustworthiness concerns under financial 
consideration. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for a public trust position. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Reasons (SOR) on July 24, 2008, detailing the trustworthiness concerns under financial 
consideration. 
 
 On July 24, 2008, Applicant’s answer to the SOR was received. Applicant elected 
to have the matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 25, 2009. The 
FORM contained 10 attachments. On March 4, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on April 3, 2009. As of April 23, 2009, no response had been 
received. On April 23, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old training specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2006, and is seeking to occupy a position of trust. At age 21, 
Applicant overextended her credit. (Item 7) She had 9 to 11 credit cards, most of which 
were opened when Applicant was between 18 and 21 years old.  
 
In July 2003, Applicant purchased a vehicle with $410 per month payments. 
(Item 10) Applicant made her payments for a year and a half before the car developed 
mechanical problems, which would have cost $3,000 to $4,000 to repair. (Item 5, 6, 7) 
She tried to trade the car but could not do so because a co-signer was required. 
Applicant had also changed jobs which resulted in a $4,000 a year pay cut. (Item 5) 
Applicant asked the finance company to come and get the car. Applicant owes $10,900 
on the repossessed vehicle.  
 
In September 2006, Applicant purchased a 2006 Chevrolet, which was 
repossessed in May 2007. Applicant stated the vehicle broke down and required 
approximately $3,000 to repair. She allowed the vehicle to be repossessed. (Item 7) 
Applicant owes $8,320 on this vehicle. 
 
Applicant’s March 2006 Credit Bureau Report (CBR) lists 16 student loan 
accounts totaling $68,000 which are listed as being in good standing with Applicant 
paying as agreed. (Items 8) Applicant’s April 2008 and February 2009 CBRs list the 
student loans as being deferred.  
 
 In January 2006, when she completed her Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Positions, she stated she was struggling to make ends meet, was paying her current 
bills, but could not afford to take action on her delinquent debt. (Item 5)  
 
 
 
3
 
Applicant’s CBRs lists 21 accounts as being charged off or placed for collection. 
The accounts include the two vehicle repossessions totaling $19,000 and 19 other 
accounts between $128 and $5,000 each. The record contains no evidence that any of 
the obligations listed in the SOR have been paid.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
 
 
4
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owes in excess of $46,000 on accounts which have been past due, 
charged off, or accounts placed for collection. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is 
documented in her credit reports, her personal subject interview by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, her SOR response, and her responses to 
interrogatories. Throughout this process, she had admitted responsibility for the 
 
 
 
5
delinquent debts. She has provided insufficient documentation to show significant 
progress in resolving her debts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s debts were incurred years ago, but they remain 
unpaid. The debts included two repossessed vehicles and past due credit card 
obligations. There is nothing unique about these kinds of debts. These are type of debts 
likely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), there is no evidence of circumstances beyond Applicant’s 
control that led to her financial problems other than her statements that at some point in 
her life she had to take a different job which paid $4,000 a year less than her prior job 
and the two cars which experienced mechanical problems she could not afford to repair. 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), there is no evidence Applicant has received 
financial counseling or that her finances are under control. There is no evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay her past due obligations. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply. 
AG & 20(e) does not apply because there is no evidence Applicant disputes the 
 
 
 
6
legitimacy of the past-due debts or has provided documented proof to substantiate a 
dispute. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred appear to be for 
routine living expenses. The past due obligations were for credit card accounts and 
vehicle repossession. Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled 
administratively, I am unable to evaluate her demeanor, appearance, or form a positive 
determination as to her truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was 
sincere, open, and honest. Even if I found for her in these matters, there is no evidence 
of payment on the delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Consideration: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.u:  Against Applicant   
 
 
 
 
7
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
