KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Although Applicant had made some efforts to resolve his debt, these efforts were not
sufficient to mitigate the substantial amount of delinquent debt alleged in the SOR.  Adverse
decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 08-07486.a1
DATE: 05/05/2009
DATE: May 5, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-07486
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 15, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 23, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, and contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s
unfavorable decision.
Applicant asserts that he feels he only owes a small portion of the outstanding debts
attributed to him, that his ex-wife accumulated many of the debts behind his back while he was
deployed in the military, that he intends to contest most of the spousal and child support arrearages
currently outstanding against him, that he has given twenty years of faithful service to his country,
that he has control over his finances now that he is away from his ex-wife, and that he is trustworthy.
Applicant also states that he was not well prepared for his hearing, could not afford an
attorney, did not understand that he could use character witnesses, and did not speak well in the
hearing setting.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge nor do they
establish a denial of procedural due process rights under the Directive.
The Judge found that Applicant had a 2002 bankruptcy which discharged more than $93,000
of debt. Applicant’s current total delinquent debt is approximately $50,000.  The Judge also found
in Applicant’s favor regarding several of the SOR allegations.  The Judge acknowledged  that
Applicant’s wife was responsible for some of the debt, but she explained why this fact did not
overcome the government’s security concerns.  A review of the record indicates that the Judge’s
factual findings are supported by the evidence.  
  
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  She concluded that, notwithstanding the partial applicability of two
Guideline F Mitigating Factors, the evidence in mitigation was of insufficient strength to overcome
the government’s security concerns.  Specifically, the Judge noted that Applicant had engaged in
repayment efforts or efforts to resolve debts through a 2002 bankruptcy and had paid a number of
small debts.  The Judge ultimately concluded, however, that because of the substantial amount of
delinquent debt remaining, Applicant had not established sufficient mitigation to satisfy his burden
of overcoming the government’s case.  This conclusion is reasonably supported by the record.  The
Judge also considered Applicant’s service to the country and the difficulties presented by Applicant’s
marriage, separation, and divorce in her whole person analysis.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
