1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04481
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
May 27, 2009
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application, on December 19, 2006
(Item 4).  On October 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E concerning the Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush on December 29, 2005,
and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on November 4, 2008, and requested
a decision without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material
(FORM) to the Applicant on February 13, 2009.  The Applicant received the FORM on
February  24, 2009, and was given 30 days to submit any additional information.  She
submitted an undated statement that was received by DOHA on March 16, 2009.  The
2
case was assigned to me on March 26, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 39 and single.  She is employed by a defense contractor and
seeks to retain a security clearance in connection with her employment. 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
The Applicant was served with Interrogatories concerning her debts on June 3,
2008.  She elected not to provide documentation verifying payments to the creditors
referred to in subparagraphs 1.a.a., 1.a.b., 1.a.c., 1.a.d., 1.a.i., 1.a.j., 1.a.k., 1.a.l.,
1.a.m., 1.a.n., 1.a.o., and 1.a.p.  (Item 7.)  The other debts set forth in the SOR were not
referred to in the Interrogatories.  
The FORM contained a Credit Bureau report dated January 24, 2007.  (Item 5.)
That report contains contact information for all of the debts referred to in the SOR,
except as noted.
1.a.a.  The Applicant denies that she is indebted to a medical practice in the
original amount of $637.00 for a judgment.  (Item 5 at 3.)  She further states that she is
unaware of the judgment.  (Item 3 at 5.)  There is no evidence that the Applicant has
taken any steps to resolve and/or pay this debt.
1.a.b.  The Applicant denies owing $43.00 for a medical debt, stating she did not
know  “who or when this debt was made.”  (Item 3 at 5.)  There is no contact information
in the Credit Bureau report concerning this debt.  This allegation is found for the
Applicant due to lack of evidence.
1.a.c.  The Applicant admits owing a bank $970.00 on an account opened in
2002.  There is no evidence that the Applicant has taken any steps to resolve and/or
pay this debt.
1.a.d.  The Applicant admits owing a debt to a credit union in the amount of
$171.00 on an account opened in 1998.  There is no evidence that the Applicant has
taken any steps to resolve and/or pay this debt. 
1.a.e.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $11,103.00 for an automobile loan in connection with a car that was
repossessed.  She states that the car was repossessed because she was laid off from
3
work and unable to maintain the payments.  (Item 3 at 5.)  The Applicant has made no
payments on this debt and has no current intention to make payments on this debt. 
1.a.f., 1.a.g. and 1.a.h.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted for three
different accounts in relation to student loans with Sallie Mae.  The total indebtedness
was originally approximately $10,456.00.  In her Answer, she stated that her intent was
to bring these accounts current with a bonus check or tax refund.  (Item 3 at 5.)  In her
Response to the FORM, she stated, “Sallie Mae has been paid by Ed Fund.  I have set
up a monthly payment with them for $87.00 a month that began on Dec. 15, 2008.”  She
submitted no other documentary evidence showing that the alleged events have taken
place.
1.a.i.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a company in the amount of
$3,070.00 for an account opened in 1998.  She states that she became delinquent with
this debt because she was laid off.  (Item 3 at 5.)  There is no evidence that the
Applicant has taken any steps to resolve and/or pay this debt.
1.a.j.  The Applicant admits owing a debt to a company in the amount of $182.00
on an account opened in 1998.  There is no evidence that the Applicant has taken any
steps to resolve and/or pay this debt. 
1.a.k.  The Applicant denies owing $1,244.00 for a medical debt, stating she did
not know  “who or when this debt was made.”  (Item 3 at 5.)  There is no contact
information in the Credit Bureau report concerning this debt.  This allegation is found for
the Applicant due to lack of evidence.
1.a.l.  The Applicant denies owing $159.00 for a medical debt, stating she did not
know  “who or when this debt was made.”  (Item 3 at 5.)  Contact information
concerning this debt is included in the Credit Bureau report.  (Item 5 at 11.)  There is no
evidence that the Applicant has taken any steps to resolve and/or pay this debt. 
1.a.m.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a telephone company in the
amount of $679.00.  In her Response to the FORM, the Applicant states that she settled
and paid this bill for a lesser amount.  This allegation is found for the Applicant. 
1.a.n.  Based on all of the available evidence, I find that this is a duplicate of the
debt set forth under 1.a.m., above.  This allegation is found for the Applicant.
1.a.o.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a company in the amount of
$1,000.00.  There is no evidence that the Applicant has taken any steps to resolve
and/or pay this debt.
1.a.p.  The Applicant admits that she is indebted to a collection agency in the
amount of $4,417.00 for medical bills.  There is no evidence that the Applicant has
taken any steps to resolve and/or pay this debt.
4
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because she has engaged in conduct which shows questionable judgment,
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
2.a.q.  The Applicant filled out her Security Clearance Application on December
19, 2006.  (Item 4.)  Question 28.a. of Item 4 asks the Applicant whether, within the last
seven years, she had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts.  She stated,
“No.” She did not set forth any of the numerous delinquent debts described under
Paragraph 1, above.  This answer was, therefore, false.  
The Applicant denied this allegation and stated, “I would never intentionally lie
about owing money.  I knew I had old debts past 7 years the only new debt was Sallie
Mae.  When I originally filled out paperwork I was up to date with them.”  (Item 3 at 6.)  I
have considered this response in relation to the rest of the available evidence and find it
lacking.  The response does not adequately explain the Applicant’s conduct.
2.a.r.  Question 28.b. of Item 4 asks the Applicant whether, as of the time she
filled out the Questionnaire, she was more than 90 days delinquent on any debts.  She
stated, “No.” She did not set forth any of the numerous delinquent debts described
under Paragraph 1, above.  This answer was, therefore, false. 
The Applicant denied this allegation and referred to her response quoted above.
I have also considered that response in relation to this allegation and find it lacking.  It
does not adequately explain the Applicant’s conduct.
2.a.s.  Question 27.d. asks whether, in the last seven years, the Applicant had
any judgments against her which had not been paid.  She answered “No.”  The
Applicant has consistently stated that, at the time she filled out the Questionnaire, she
had no knowledge of any judgment being filed against her.  Based on the available
evidence, I find this denial to be both plausible and reasonable.  This allegation is found
for the Applicant.
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for
each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access
to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
5
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
6
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. The evidence shows that the Applicant has over $32,165.00 in past
due debts, all of which have been due and owing for several years. This figure excludes
the amounts in allegations 1.b., 1.a.k., 1.a.m. and 1.a.n., which I have found for the
Applicant.  The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions,
requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties arose primarily between 2001 and 2002.  However, she only began
paying the debts in 2008 - 2009, during the pendency of this proceeding.  While she has
made strides in paying her indebtedness, the fact that she had so many bad debts, for
so long, and did nothing to pay them until a little over a year ago, is still troubling.  This
mitigating condition is not applicable to this case.  
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn . . .), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.”  The Applicant argues that some of these debts
came from unemployment or underemployment in the 2001 through 2002 time frame.
However, the Applicant has been working at her present employer since June 2006
without making any strides to pay her debts until very recently.  I cannot find, under
these particular facts, that the Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances.
The Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to pay off some of her creditors.
The evidence shows that she has paid off approximately $1,000.00 to four creditors.
However, she continues to owe over $30,000.00 to at least ten creditors.  In addition,
there is no evidence that she has contacted any of the creditors, even though the
FORM provided her with a Credit Bureau report with that information.  AG ¶ 20(d) is
arguably applicable.
AG ¶ 20(c) states that it may be mitigating where, “there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control.”  Her past due indebtedness appears
to all predate 2005. She is slowly paying her past due indebtedness.  This mitigating
condition is arguably applicable.
7
I have weighed the Applicant’s conduct in paying some of her accounts in the
past year.  In addition, I have looked at the circumstances in which she allowed this
conduct to occur, particularly that she was laid off.  While she is paying her debts off,
and is to be commended for that, I find that it is still too soon, given the other
circumstances of this case, to find that this conduct may not recur in the future.
Paragraph 1 is found against the Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG & 15:      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16(a) states that it may be disqualifying where an Applicant engages in the
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”  
The Applicant’s Questionnaire contains false answers about her financial
situation.  I have considered her written statement, wherein she states that she would
not falsify a questionnaire about her debts.  That bald statement, standing alone, is
insufficient evidence to mitigate her conduct.  She obviously knew she had bad debts,
and for some reason did not tell the Government about them.  It is her burden to show
that the act was a benign error and not an intentional falsehood.  She has not done so.
None of the mitigating conditions apply.  Based on the record, I find the Applicant
intentionally falsified her answers as set forth in subparagraphs 2.a.q. and 2.a.r.  Based
on all of the information set forth above, Paragraph 2 is found against the Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
8
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), all of the
Applicant’s conduct, financial, and personal, is frequent and relatively recent.  Based on
the state of the record, I cannot find that there have been permanent behavioral
changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  Accordingly, at the present time, I cannot find that there is
little to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), or that
the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and/or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing her request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly,
the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's
Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.f.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.g.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.h.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.i.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.j.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.k.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.l.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.m.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.n.: For the Applicant
9
Subparagraph 1.a.o.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.p.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c.: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
