 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR No. 08-05274 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On August 15, 2005, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On November 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 30, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on February 12, 
2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing on February 26, 2009, scheduling the hearing for 
April 8, 2009. I convened the hearing on said date. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 into evidence, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F into 
evidence that were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 15, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. 12) The request and the attached documents are 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through V. Applicant did not object to 
my consideration of those Exhibits. Hence, the facts administratively noticed are limited 
to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He was born in Iraq and went to high school there. 
From September 1974 to September 1977, he attended an Iraqi university where he 
earned a bachelor’s degree in agricultural engineering. In 1978, he married his wife, an 
Iraqi citizen at the time.  As required by the Iraqi government, he began basic training in 
the army in December 1978. He left the army without permission in February 1979 and 
went to Kuwait in October 1979. His wife joined him four to six months later. They lived 
there until late 1985, when they came to the United States on visitors’ visas. They 
stayed for a couple months, during which time they applied for immigrant visas with the 
help of Applicant’s brother, who was residing in the United States. (GE 2). 
 
 Upon being denied U.S. immigrant visas, Applicant and his wife went to Canada 
in early 1986, as refugees, while waiting for U.S. permanent resident status. In 1990, he 
obtained Canadian citizenship, as did his wife and two sons. One of his sons was born 
in Iraq and one son was born in Kuwait. His daughter was born in Canada. They lived 
and worked in Canada until October 1996 when they moved to the United States after 
being granted U.S. resident alien status. In August 2004, Applicant and his family 
became naturalized U.S. citizens.  
 
  After arriving in the United States in 1996, Applicant worked as a truck driver and 
his wife found a position in a bank. In February 2004, he obtained a position with a 
federal contractor to work with the U.S. Coalition Forces (Forces) to help organize the 
 
 
 
 
3
Iraqi elections.  He worked in Iraq until July 2004, when he returned to the United States 
and resumed his previous job as a truck driver. (GE 2) In August 2005, Applicant was 
hired by a federal contractor as a bilingual, bi-cultural agricultural advisor for the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. In that role, he has been assisting the Iraqi government in 
the improvement of its agricultural resources and conditions. (Tr. 24) There is no 
evidence that Applicant returned to Iraq until February 2004 when he was employed by 
the Forces. 
 
 Applicant and his family maintain dual citizenship with Canada. He never voted in 
any Canadian election and does not hold any property or have any financial interests in 
Canada. He does not travel to Canada to maintain privileges of citizenship. The last 
time he used his Canadian passport was to travel to Iraq between March 2004 and July 
2004, when he was employed by the Forces and sent to Iraq. He destroyed that 
passport in September 2004, when he received his U.S. passport (after becoming a 
U.S. citizen in August 2004). He has traveled to Canada periodically for a vacation, 
using his state’s driver license or U.S. passport.  His last visit was in December 2008 for 
a short vacation. (GE 1) He has no intention of exercising any rights as a Canadian 
citizen.1 (GE 2) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Iraq. They are deceased. Both of them were 
teachers. (Tr. 34) He is one of six children, four boys and two girls, all of whom were 
born in Iraq. One of his brothers was killed during the Iraq-Iran war. One brother is a 
U.S. naturalized citizen and resident of the United States. He is a practicing physician. 
His third brother is a citizen resident of Iraq. In August 2008, that brother retired from his 
government position as an accountant for the Ministry of Defense. (Tr. 38) Applicant 
saw him about six months ago in the Green Zone of Iraq because both of their offices 
are located in the international area. (Tr. 39) He speaks to his brother about once every 
month and a half. (Id.) Applicant’s two sisters are resident citizens of Iraq. One of them 
is a widow and the other is single. Neither of them works. (Tr. 29) He rarely sees them 
because they live outside of the Green Zone. He speaks to them every couple months. 
(Tr. 40) The last time he saw them was in 2006 when he visited their city on business. 
They do not know that he works in Iraq for the U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Tr. 41) 
His wife has two sisters, who are resident citizens of Iraq. He does not have any contact 
with them. He does not know how often his wife speaks to them. She has not seen her 
sisters since leaving Iraq in 1979. (Tr. 43) 
      
 Applicant owns two houses in the United States and has U. S. bank accounts. 
(Tr. 27) His wife is a manager of a bank. (Tr. 26) His two sons work for U.S. companies 
and his daughter goes to cosmetology school. (Tr. 48) He does not own any property in 
Iraq. (Tr. 55) There is no derogatory information in the record concerning his police or 
financial records. He has never been fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He 
has never used illegal drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related incident. (GE 1) 
 
                                            
1The SOR did not raise any security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference.  
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant submitted several exhibits, setting forth his accomplishments while 
working in Iraq.  In May 2004, the Governance Coordinator for the Coalition Provisional 
Authority recommended Applicant for a position with the new U.S. Embassy in 
Baghdad. The Coordinator noted that “During the outbreak of criminal violence last 
month, you continued your work, at great personal risk, which ensured that we were 
able to make rapid progress when security was restored.” (GE 2) In June 2004, the 
Administrator for the Coalition Provisional Authority thanked him for his efforts in 
working to establish a democracy. (AE D) In June 2006, the Director of the Civil Military 
Operations Directorate recognized Applicant’s talents and assistance. He wrote, 
“Through [Applicant’s] connections with the Iraqi government and with his ability to 
knowledgably communicate about agricultural issues and especially in Arabic, he has 
been able to help the Coalition Forces forge forward in developing national level policies 
and assist in building a cohesive partnership between the two governments in the area 
of Agriculture.” (GE 2) 
 
  In 2007, Applicant received a 2006 Foreign Agricultural Service Honorary Award 
for “selfless dedication to rebuilding a strong relationship with Iraq and cultivating an 
environment of trust and partnership.” (AE A) The U.S. Agriculture Attaché submitted a 
strong Letter of Recommendation, referencing Applicant’s work from September 2006 to 
February 2009. He noted that Applicant had passed through security and background 
checks. He stated, “Performing as much more than just a Bilingual/Bicultural advisor, 
we rely on [Applicant] as a key interlocutor for our diplomatic engagements . . . His 
performance has been all the more remarkable given the stressful, dangerous, and 
chaotic working conditions in Iraq.” (AE B) The Senior Strategic Policy Advisor at the 
U.S. Embassy Baghdad submitted a letter, having worked with Applicant for more than 
two years. In February 2009, he wrote that Applicant “is an individual with tremendous 
professional and personal worth to our office with the U.S. Embassy in a war-zone 
theater of operations. This letter of introduction will serve as my highest 
recommendation for a most valued and loyal employee.” (AE C) 
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship and desire 
to continue his work with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. “I am American . . . My 
loyalty is for this country.” (Tr. 47) In his closing argument, he stated: 
 
 I know, ma’am, the Iraq is dangerous country, but we have to realize one 
day this country is going to be normal country, and if we don’t take the risk 
to make the change I don’t think anybody can make the change.  And we 
are the people we could make the change to help the U.S. government. 
And we [have] been working so hard to achieve this, this goal.  (Tr. 53) 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Hearing Exhibits, including 
the fact that in 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from 
power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s new government took office. Despite the 
elections and new government, Iraq remains engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al 
Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have 
targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even 
 
 
 
 
5
with aggressive governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq 
remains, although there has been a decrease in violence since January 2008. “An 
improved security environment has resulted from the combined factors of Coalition 
troop surge and sustained presence, the declared ceasefire by Muqtada al-Sadr’s Jaysh 
al Mahdi militia in August, improved Iraqi Security Forces proficiency, and increasing 
popular support for the actions of Iraqi Forces again AQI and other extremist groups.” 
(HE IV). Terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state 
intelligence services.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
 
 
6
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for foreign influence are set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;2 and, 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
                                            
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Since leaving Iraq, Applicant has maintained telephone contact with his brother 
and two sisters, who are residents and citizens of Iraq. He does not maintain contact 
with his two sister-in-laws. After he started working in Iraq in 2005, Applicant periodically 
saw his brother who worked in the same international complex where he worked. He 
speaks to him approximately once a month. He calls his sisters every couple months 
but has not seen either of them since 2006. His sisters do not know that he works for 
the U.S. government in Iraq. Applicant’s connections to his family in Iraq could create a 
potential conflict of interest between his security obligations and desire to help them, 
only in a situation wherein they were taken hostage or otherwise threatened with harm if 
he did not cooperate. Since retiring, his brother is no longer connected with the Iraqi 
government. His sisters do not work. None of them have positions in which they could 
otherwise benefit from his access to sensitive information or technology. However, 
under either disqualifying condition, security concerns in this case could arise in 
connection with the potential that hostile forces might seek protected information from 
Applicant by threatening harm to his family members in Iraq.  
  
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifying conditions, 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the 
resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The current positions and activities of Applicant’s family members in Iraq do not 
involve the government or military and they would have no interest in acquiring 
protected information. Only their physical presence creates the potential that their 
interests could be threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a choice 
between their interest and those of the United States. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some 
application.   
 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant produced significant evidence establishing AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his 
relationship and depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict 
of interest in favor of the United States. He has lived in the United States since 1996 
and has not returned to Iraq until his employment with the U. S. Coalition Forces in 
February 2004. His wife and children are U.S. citizens, residing and working in the 
United States. He owns property and holds bank accounts in the United States. He 
worked for a U.S. company before starting his position with a federal contractor. He 
does not own property in Iraq and has had limited contact with three siblings living 
there. While in Iraq, he has willingly risked his life to support the U.S. efforts. There is no 
evidence that he has connections or contact with any people other than his family 
members. He refers to himself as an “American.” 
 
Applicant maintains ongoing, albeit sporadic, communication with his siblings in 
Iraq. Hence, AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply, as those contacts are sufficiently frequent and not 
casual.  
 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or 
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Three circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are 
hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even 
 
 
 
 
9
friendly governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s siblings to obtain such 
information. Second, he had numerous connections to Iraq before he immigrated to the 
United States in 1996. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there. He was 
educated at an Iraqi college, married there, and has one son that was born there. Third, 
three of his siblings and two in-laws remain resident citizens of Iraq.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 12 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen for almost five years. His spouse and children are 
naturalized U.S. citizens. Out of his sense of patriotism for the United States in its 
endeavors in Iraq, he has worked for the U.S. government as an Arabic-speaking 
advisor. His ties to the United States, which he refers to as his country, are much 
stronger than his ties to his three siblings or two sister-in-laws living in Iraq. There is no 
evidence he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United 
States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and he has worked diligently 
and impressively for three years in an important capacity for the U.S. efforts. His 
supervisors and colleagues assess him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, and 
responsible, giving him excellent evaluations and praising his dedication to the cause of 
freedom in Iraq. He is a good family member, employee and U.S. citizen. After leaving 
Iraq in 1979, he never returned until he worked with the U.S. forces in February 2004, 
which was prior to his obtaining U.S. citizenship. 
 
 No witnesses recommended denial of Applicant’s security clearance. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record. There is evidence that he has 
successfully worked in high-risk circumstances and made significant contributions to the 
United States in its agricultural efforts in Iraq. He credibly asserted his allegiance to the 
United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s commendable 
performance as a bi-cultural translator and advisor in Iraq, I conclude Applicant has fully 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.3 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
                                            
3I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
 
 
 
 
10
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                             ________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
