 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05334 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), G (Alcohol Consumption), and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 18, 2007. On 
February 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H, G, and F. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 13, 2009; answered it on February 26, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on March 3, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 19, 
2009, and the case was assigned to me on March 26, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 30, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 20, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
I, which were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the 
hearing on April 20, 2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 28, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d 
through 1.f, and 3.a through 3.u. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old pipe fitter employed in a government shipyard. He has 
worked for his current employer since July 1985. He has held a clearance since August 
1990.  
 
 Applicant was married in July 1989. Two children, ages 24 and 15, were born 
during the marriage. Applicant’s spouse has a 29-year-old daughter from a previous 
relationship (Tr. 39).  
 
 In his security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he started using 
marijuana at age 21 and used it about four times and month until January 2005. He also 
disclosed that he started using cocaine at age 28 and had used it daily for the three 
years preceding his application. He disclosed his in-patient treatment for alcohol 
dependence, cocaine dependence, and major depression on two occasions, in 
November and December 2002 and in February and March 2005. He disclosed he had 
been spending his entire pay check and selling or pawning personal possessions to 
support his dependency, his wages had been garnished for delinquent utility bills in 
January 2000 and his debts for medical treatment in January and February 2005 were 
more than 180 days delinquent (GX 1). At the hearing, he testified he spent his entire 
paycheck on drugs when he was younger, but more recently he was spending only $40 
or $50 for drugs (Tr. 48). 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories on August 4, 2008, Applicant disclosed he 
had been treated for drug abuse from June 14 to June 20, 2008, and that he had 
stopped using illegal substances about a year before because he saw his life “going 
down hill” and he was hurting his family. He stated he was not participating in Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization, but he had “found faith in the Lord” and had a 
different outlook on life (GX 2 at 4, 7-8). In response to supplemental interrogatories on 
April 10, 2009, he stated he was regularly attending church to assist him from drinking 
alcoholic beverages, and he had last consumed alcohol in June 2008, when he 
consumed a 40-ounce container of beer (GX 4 at 2-3; Tr. 54).  
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f that he failed an employment drug 
screening in June 1998. He admitted, however, that he was admitted to a hospital in 
1998 for drug treatment and was diagnosed as suffering from alcohol dependence and 
cocaine abuse (Tr. 51-52). He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c that he used PCP 
[phencyclidine] “and/or” LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] once in February 2000 (Tr. 50). 
He admitted being referred to a drug treatment facility in August 2000 and being 
discharged a month later for failure to comply with the program (Tr. 52). He admitted 
being treated in April 2003 and July 2004, going to the emergency room for substance 
abuse in February 2005, and being admitted to a hospital for major depression in April 
2006 (Tr. 53). He admitted using crack cocaine once on June 13, 2008, and then 
admitting himself into a one-week drug treatment program on June 14, 2008 (Tr. 58). 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in November 1999, listing 
liabilities totaling about $60,000. He received a discharge in February 2000 (Tr. 60-61). 
The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a. His credit reported dated March 8, 2007, 
reflected his bankruptcy as well as 20 delinquent debts incurred after the bankruptcy 
(GX 3). 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had settled the auto repossession debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 3.b, a delinquent telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 3.c, and a delinquent 
credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 3.q (AX A; AX B, AX D; Tr. 65-68). He was making 
monthly payments on the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 3.s (AX H; AX I; Tr. 70-71). The 
medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 3.s appears to duplicate the medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 
3.d, since the amounts are similar and they both have the same account number (GX 3 
at 12, 13). The medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.e-3.p and 3.t, totaling about $10,466, 
as well as the $500 credit card account alleged in ¶ 3.r, are unresolved. The $11,534 
auto repossession debt alleged in SOR ¶ 3.u is unresolved. Applicant and his wife also 
had settled two delinquent telephone bills (AX E; AX G) and a delinquent medical bill 
(AX F) that were reflected on their credit report but not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement dated August 4, 2008, in 
response to DOHA interrogatories. It reflected net monthly income of $2,454, expenses 
of $1,826, no debt payments, and a remainder of $628 (GX 2 at 18). At the hearing, he 
testified his net monthly pay is about $2,000 per month, and his wife also is employed, 
but he does not know how much she earns (Tr. 75). His wife takes care of the family 
finances, and he concentrates on his job (Tr. 37).They purchased their home in August 
2008, after he submitted his personal financial statement, trading land that Applicant 
inherited for the home. They did not borrow any money to acquire the home (Tr. 73). 
Purchasing the home reduced their monthly expenses by eliminating the monthly rent of 
$225. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
 
4 
 
 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
 
5 
 
 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used cocaine, “with varying frequency to include, at 
times, daily” from 1992 to January 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a); he used marijuana with varying 
frequency from 1985 to January 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b); he used PCP “and/or” LSD once in 
February 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.c); he purchased illegal drugs on numerous occasions (SOR ¶ 
1.d); and he used illegal drugs after being granted a security clearance in 1990 (SOR ¶ 
1.e). It also alleges he was referred to a hospital after failing an employment drug 
screening in June 1998 and was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and cocaine 
abuse (SOR ¶ 1.f). Finally, it alleges he was referred to a hospital on August 9, 2000, 
and treated for cocaine dependence following a relapse and suicidal ideation, but he 
was discharged on September 9, 2000 for failing to attend prescribed treatment 
sessions (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse 
of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 
24(a)(1). Drug abuse is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse@; Aillegal 
drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia@; and “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g). Applicant admitted purchasing 
and using cocaine and marijuana after being granted a clearance, as alleged in the 
SOR. He denied failing an “employment drug screening” as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but he 
admitted the remaining allegations in SOR ¶ 1.f that he was referred to a hospital and 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence and cocaine abuse. Finally, he admitted being 
treated for cocaine dependence after a relapse and being discharged from treatment for 
failing to attend treatment sessions, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant’s admissions 
and the evidence produced by the government raise AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g). 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline also include “diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of 
drug abuse or drug dependence”; “evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program”; and “failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional”. AG ¶¶ 25(d), (e), and (f). These disqualifying 
 
6 
 
 
conditions are not raised because there is no evidence of the qualifications of the 
persons who diagnosed Applicant or prescribed treatment. 
 Applicant denied using PCP or LSD as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and the 
government produced no evidence to support this allegation. I conclude Applicant has 
refuted SOR ¶ 1.c, and I resolve it in his favor. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first clause of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent.  There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant’s last use of cocaine was on June 13, 2008, less than a year ago, and 
it followed drug treatment and relapse in June 1998, September 2000, April 2003, July 
2004, and February 2005. Given his history of treatment and relapse, insufficient time 
has passed since his last relapse to establish his rehabilitation. His drug abuse has 
been frequent, did not occur under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and raises 
doubt about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
26(a) is not established.  
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant has declared his intent 
not to use drugs again, but he has not demonstrated his intent by any of the indicators 
set out in this guideline. As noted above in the discussion of AG ¶ 26(a), his period of 
abstinence from drugs is insufficient to establish that he is not likely to relapse again. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by “satisfactory 
completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to 
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable 
 
7 
 
 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.” AG ¶ 26(d). Applicant receives 
some mitigating credit for admitting himself into a drug treatment program several times, 
most recently in June 2008, but this mitigating condition is not fully established because 
there is no evidence of a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f (diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence in June 1998) under this guideline. The concern under this guideline is set 
out in AG ¶ 21 as follows: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” 
 
Security concerns under this guideline may be raised by “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 
22(a). Security concerns also may arise from “alcohol-related incidents at work, such as 
reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent.” AG ¶ 22(b). Neither of these disqualifying conditions is raised, because 
there is no evidence of an “alcohol-related incidents,” either at work or away from work. 
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “habitual or binge consumption of 
alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶ 22(c). While Applicant 
admitted on his security clearance application that he is alcohol dependent, this 
disqualifying condition is not raised because there is no evidence of the extent of 
Applicant’s alcohol consumption.  
 
A disqualifying condition also may be raised either by “diagnosis by a duly 
qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence” or by “evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program.” AG ¶ 22(d) and (e). These disqualifying conditions are not 
established because there is no evidence of the professional qualifications of the person 
who diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent. 
 
Finally, a disqualifying condition may be raised by “relapse after diagnosis of 
alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.” AG 
¶ 22(f). Applicant admitted in two sets of responses to interrogatories that he had 
received treatment due to his use of alcohol (GX 2 at 7; GX 4 at 3). He disclosed on his 
security clearance application that he was treated in 2002 and 2005 for alcohol 
dependence. He admitted he consumed a 40-ounce container of beer in June 2008. 
This evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 22(f). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant was 
diagnosed and treated for alcohol dependence in 1998, 2002, and 2005. He relapsed in 
June 2008. His alcohol consumption was recent, frequent, and did not occur under 
circumstances unlikely to recur, and casts doubt on his current reliability and 
trustworthiness. I conclude AG ¶ 23(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).” AG ¶ 23(b). Applicant 
acknowledged his past alcohol dependence. He relies on his church and his family to 
avoid problems with alcohol. Nevertheless, he was treated three times for alcohol 
dependence, and he relapsed in June 2008. I conclude this mitigating condition is not 
established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.” AG ¶ 23(d). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
has not demonstrated a “clear and established pattern” of abstinence, and there is no 
evidence of a favorable prognosis by a qualified medical professional or licensed clinical 
social worker. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in February 2000 (SOR ¶ 
3.a) and 20 delinquent debts that were incurred after the bankruptcy discharge (SOR ¶ 
3.b-3.u). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
 
9 
 
 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is “indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶ 19(a) and (c). In 
addition, his irresponsible spending to buy illegal drugs instead of paying his debts 
raises AG ¶ 19(b). 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports indicate that the medical bill in SOR ¶ 3.s duplicates the 
medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 3.d. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR 
under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in 
Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same 
debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 3.d in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, are not yet resolved, did not occur under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur, and cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established, because Applicant’s financial problems were caused largely by his drug 
involvement.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Neither 
prong of this mitigating condition is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant’s bankruptcy was a lawful means 
of resolving the $60,000 in debts that were discharged, but it does not necessarily 
establish good faith, especially because Applicant’s financial problems leading up to the 
bankruptcy were drug-related. Applicant has resolved the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 3.b, 3.c, and 3.q, and he is making payments on the medical bill alleged in ¶ 
3.s. He has done nothing to resolve the other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. I 
 
10 
 
 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 3.b, 3.c, 3.q, and 3.s, but 
not for bankruptcy and the other delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H, G, and F in my whole person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. Notwithstanding his drug problems, he has managed 
to serve satisfactorily for more almost 24 years, and he has held a clearance, 
apparently without incident, for almost 19 years. He was candid about his substance 
abuse on his security clearance application, in his responses to DOHA interrogatories, 
and at the hearing. To his credit, he has sought and received treatment for his drug 
dependence, and he has turned to his church and his family for support, but more time 
is needed to determine if he has successfully turned his life around. He has begun to 
address his financial problems, but he is a long way from the end of his financial 
distress. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, G, 
and F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guidelines G, H and F. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.b-3.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.e-3.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.q:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.r:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.s:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.t-3.u:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
