  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is also adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is
dated after the effective date.  
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 08-05602
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order,
DoD Directive, and Revised Guidelines,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals1
(DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 27, 2008. The
SOR is equivalent to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the
 The government’s brief includes several attachments referred to as items. They are referred to as exhibits2
herein. 
2
action. The issues in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based
on a history of financial problems.
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on January 9, 2009, and
he elected a decision without a hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided based on
the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On January 30, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM)  was mailed to Applicant and received by him on February2
9, 2009. He replied to the FORM within the allowed 30-day period, and his reply
consists of a one-page letter from his facility security officer and a one-page letter from
a creditor. Department counsel, via a memorandum dated April 8, 2009, raised no
objections, and so those matters are admitted as Exhibit A. The case was assigned to
me on May 1, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges that Applicant owes seven creditors the total
sum of approximately $14,050 in delinquent debt. The vast majority of the debt stems
from a delinquent car loan for $13,249, and the balance of $801 stems from six medical
accounts placed for collection. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the
medical accounts and denied the car loan because he had begun making monthly
payments on the debt. 
Applicant is a 61-year-old security officer for a federal contractor. He has worked
for his current employer since 1994. It appears the Defense Department granted him a
security clearance in 1998. He has a history of financial problems as established by the
credit reports in the FORM.  
According to a March 2008 credit report, the car loan is a joint contractual liability
for $13,249 (Exhibit 5), and so Applicant is not solely responsible for the debt. The loan
ended with a voluntary repossession. By March 2009, the balance had been reduced to
$5,689, and Applicant settled the account with a lump-sum payment of $1,500 (Exhibit
A). Accordingly, the account is resolved. 
The six unpaid medical accounts for a total of $801 are based on a October 2008
credit report (Exhibit 8). Applicant did not present any information on these debts.
Accordingly, these accounts are unresolved. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
3
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
4
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more17
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
 As an aside, some in the field of personal finance contend that medical debt rarely indicates if a borrower18
is high risk and question if such debts belong on credit reports. See Liz Pulliam W eston, Why Medical Debts
Shouldn’t Count, http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com/Banking/YourCreditRating/W hyMedicalDebtsShouldn’t
Count, published Nov. 19, 2007. 
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 19
5
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
All the mitigating conditions have been considered and the most pertinent here is MC 4,
which concerns initiating a good-faith effort to repay.  
Applicant receives credit under MC 4 because of his efforts to resolve the car
loan. The debt was settled in full in March 2009. By doing so, he resolved approximately
94% of the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR. Although he did not resolve the medical
debts,  which constitute a minor part of the SOR, his efforts are sufficient to qualify for18
mitigation within the meaning of MC 4. 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate a
person’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the person’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed in the Revised Guidelines as follows: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.  19
6
After weighing the record evidence as a whole and giving it due consideration
under the whole-person concept, Applicant did present sufficient evidence to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. He did not present a perfect case in
mitigation by resolving all of the delinquent debts, but it is sufficient to overcome the
security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
