 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02246 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on September 13, 2005. On July 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 21, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on February 13, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on February 18, 
2009.  Applicant received the FORM on February 27, 2009. He had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. He did not submit a response. On April 23, 2009, the FORM 
was forwarded to the hearing office. The FORM was assigned to me on April 27, 2009. 
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.l. 
He denies the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.m. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant is a 71-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed as a program manager with the 
defense contractor since January 2005. He is married and has three adult children. 
(Item 4)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts:  
a $23,000 delinquent credit card account placed for collection in October 2002 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 7 at 2); a $3,045 account placed for collection in May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 7 
at 2); a $1,327 credit card account placed for collection in January 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2); a $6,818 credit card account that was charged off in January 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 7 at 1; Item 8 at 1, 3; Item 9 at 5); a $7,156 credit card account 
that was charged off in February 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 7 at 2; Item 9 at 5); a $13,000 
account placed for collection in April 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.f); a $50,000 account placed for 
collection in July 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2); a $8,554 credit card 
account that was charged off in February 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2; Item 
9 at 4); a $10,563 account placed for collection in February 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 7 at 
2; Item 8 at 2; Item 9 at 4); a $4,352 credit card account charged off in February 2004 
(SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 8 at 1; Item 9 at 5); a $13,218 account placed for collection in February 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Item 8 at 2). 
 
In February 2005, one of Applicant’s homes was foreclosed. The mortgage 
amount was $456,996. The home was sold in September 2005 and the debt was 
settled. (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 6).   
 
There is no record evidence supporting the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. I find for 
Applicant with respect to that allegation.  
 
Applicant encountered financial problems after he was fired from a well paying 
job in April 2003. He was the president of the company. He was unemployed for one 
year. He is now gainfully employed and is meeting his current expenses. He states he 
has no means to pay off his older debts. He denies the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
(Items 5 and 6; Answer to SOR)  On April 10, 2006, Applicant was interviewed by an 
investigator in conjunction with his background investigation. During the interview, they 
reviewed Applicant’s monthly budget. His total net monthly income was $7,035. His total 
net monthly expenses were $4,948. After expenses, he had $2,087 left over.  He stated 
his debts were too massive to pay off each creditor. (Item 6) 
 
 
3 
 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he has two additional 
monthly expenses totaling $1,367. After expenses, he has approximately $720 left over 
each month. Applicant states that he lives within his means. He stated that he does not 
generate enough income to repay his delinquent debts. (Item 2) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. Between 2002 and 2008, Applicant 
incurred 11 delinquent debts, totaling $128,033. He also had a home foreclosure in 
February 2005.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant continued to incur delinquent accounts as recently as May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
None of the delinquent accounts have been resolved. Applicant claims he is incapable 
of resolving these delinquent accounts even though he has more than $700 left over 
after expenses each month.     
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant was fired from a  
job in April 2003 which caused a substantial strain on his finances. However, he took no 
steps to resolve his delinquent accounts after becoming employed full-time in 2004.  
This mitigating condition is given less weight considering his failure to take steps to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. He has not acted responsibly under the circumstances.    
 
 
5 
 
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling. He has not taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts. Financial 
counseling could have assisted Applicant in determining the best approach to resolve 
these accounts either through repayment or possibly bankruptcy.  Although he states he 
is capable of paying his recent financial accounts, his delinquent accounts remain 
unresolved. His financial situation is unlikely to be resolved soon. 
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant took no action towards 
resolving his delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) potentially applies with respect to the $23,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
Applicant disputes this debt. However, he provided no evidence that he is taking action 
to formally dispute this debt. There is insufficient proof to apply FC MC ¶20(e).  
 
Although Applicant has been employed since 2004, he took no action towards 
resolving his delinquent accounts. He claims he does not have the means to repay his 
older accounts. His failure to take steps to resolve his delinquent accounts remains a 
security concern. He has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a significant amount 
of unresolved delinquent debt. Although his financial problems were aggravated by his 
employment termination in 2003, his failure to address his delinquent debts remains a 
 
6 
 
 
security concern. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
