KEYWORD: Guideline D; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge found that Applicant was tried in 2004 for forcible sodomy upon a minor. 
At his trial, Applicant gave false testimony.  He was convicted of consensual sodomy.  At
sentencing, he revealed that he lied.  The court sentenced him to 12 months incarceration, two
years of post-release supervision, to be registered as a sex offender, and a $2,500 fine.  In 2005,
Applicant entered an Alford plea to perjury.  He was sentenced to be incarcerated for five years
with two and a half years suspended.  He also received two years of probation. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 08-00969
DATE: 05/28/2009
DATE: May 28, 2009
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 08-00969
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Judge found in favor of Applicant regarding the allegations brought under Guideline D and also1
subparagraph 2.a. of Guideline J.  Those favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On November
19, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 17, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Mark W. Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness determination.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s adverse
trustworthiness determination.  1
Specifically, Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that none of the Guideline J
mitigating conditions fully apply. 
The Judge found that Applicant was tried in 2004 for committing forcible sodomy upon a
minor.  At his trial, Applicant provided false testimony concerning the details and the severity of the
offense.  Applicant was convicted of consensual sodomy.  At his sentencing proceeding, Applicant
revealed that he lied during the trial on the merits.  The court sentenced him to be incarcerated for
12 months, to two years of post-release supervision, to be registered as a sex offender, and to a
$2,500 fine.  In 2005, Applicant entered an Alford plea to perjury.  He was sentenced to be
incarcerated for five years with two and a half years suspended, to run concurrently with his previous
sentence.  He also received two years of probation.  
Applicant asserts that trustworthiness concerns have been mitigated because: (i) he was
sexually abused many times by his older brother during his youth, and this experience made it
difficult for him to come to terms with his own acts of sodomy upon a minor; (ii) this difficulty in
coming to terms with his past led to his commission of perjury during his trial; (iii) his ultimate
truthfulness in fully disclosing his illegal acts is evidence of his rehabilitation; and (iv) his active
participation in therapy and the dedication he has shown toward it establish that four and a half years
is sufficient time since the offenses to mitigate any trustworthiness concerns.   These assertions do
not establish error on the part of the Judge.
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
3
favorable trustworthiness determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence
as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in
a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He applied applicable mitigating conditions and found in Applicant’s favor
regarding the allegations under Guideline D and the sodomy conviction under Guideline J.
However, the Judge concluded that there was insufficient evidence to mitigate the perjury conviction
under Guideline J.  The Judge’s conclusion regarding the perjury conviction is sustainable.  The
Judge  considered Applicant’s past history with his older brother and its effects, his efforts at
rehabilitation,  and his solid employment record in his whole person analysis.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  Therefore, the
Judge’s unfavorable trustworthiness determination is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s unfavorable trustworthiness determination is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
