                                                              
 
 
1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05459 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated drug involvement security concerns because his drug use 
was relatively isolated and not recent. However, he failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. He did not make any payments in 2008 or 2009 
towards the debts listed in his statement of reasons (SOR). His clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86), 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On December 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny Applicant eligibility for access to classified information, citing security concerns 
under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
 
 
2 
                                           
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On February 2, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 
12, 2009. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2009. On April 17, 2009, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice. The hearing was held on May 19, 2009. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered six exhibits (GEs 1-6) (Transcript (Tr.) 16-17), and 
Applicant did not offer any exhibits. There were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-6 
(Tr. 17). Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR and response to the SOR (GEs 
7-9). I received the transcript on May 27, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In his SOR response, Applicant admitted his responsibility for all of the SOR 
debts (GE 9). He also admitted the drug offenses listed in the SOR (GE 9). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old senior quality assurance analyst employed by a 
government contractor (Tr. 6, 18, 20). He graduated from high school in 1979, and 
attended college for about one year (Tr. 6-7; GE 1). He served in the Air Force on active 
duty for four years and in the reserves for two years (Tr. 7; GE 1). He held a Secret 
security clearance while on active duty (Tr. 7). He was divorced in November 2007 (Tr. 
19). He is considering reconciliation with his former wife (Tr. 36). His three children are 
ages eight, 20 and 21 years old (Tr. 19).  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Around the period of 1999 to 2000, Applicant purchased a small amount of 
cocaine from a friend (Tr. 22). He used cocaine two or three times (Tr. 22-25, 36-37; 
SOR ¶ 1.a). During this same time period, his employer conducted a urinalysis test and 
Applicant tested “positive,” establishing the presence of the cocaine metabolite in his 
urine (Tr. 25; SOR ¶ 1.b). He said his cocaine use was for a brief period of time, 
perhaps a month (Tr. 25). He completed a drug rehabilitation program, lasting about 
four to six weeks (Tr. 26). The drug rehabilitation involved counseling, group meetings 
and drug tests (Tr. 26). 
 
In October 2006, Applicant was arrested for possession of an open container of 
alcohol, driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), and possession of 
methamphetamine (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 9). He also used methamphetamine shortly before 
he began driving on the trip where he was arrested (Tr. 28-31; SOR ¶ 1.c). It was the 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
first time he ever used methamphetamine (Tr. 38). He had an open can of beer in the 
car (Tr. 30). He failed a field sobriety test (Tr. 31). He had some methamphetamine on 
his person (Tr. 32). He was arrested and jailed for about 48 hours (Tr. 32). The charges 
were dismissed because of procedural issues (Tr. 32-33).  He did not receive drug 
counseling in specific relation to his methamphetamine use. 
 
Applicant denied that he used illegal drugs on other occasions (Tr. 29, 33-34). He 
asserted his drug use was stress related because he was having problems with his 
marriage, his daughter and other custody issues (Tr. 34). His daughter had behavioral 
problems (Tr. 34). He went to stress counseling for his separation and pending divorce, 
which also addressed his methamphetamine use (Tr. 35). He did not disclose his 
methamphetamine use to his employer because he was worried about losing his job (Tr. 
36). He denied that he used illegal drugs after 2006, and offer to submit to random 
urinalysis drug testing (Tr. 55). 
 
Financial considerations 
 
Applicant worked for his current employer from January 1986 to January 1994, 
and from June 2002 to the present (Tr. 20). His current annual salary is $67,000 (Tr. 
21). He does not pay child support for his two oldest children (Tr. 20). He pays $716 
monthly support to his former spouse for his eight year old son (Tr. 51).  
 
Applicant did not make any payments towards the debts in SOR ¶¶ 2.a ($176), 
2.b ($508), 2.c ($657), 2.d ($218), 2.e ($5,688), 2.f ($1,098), 2.g ($888), 2.h ($700), 2.i 
($400), or 2.j ($600) (Tr. 40). The sources of his SOR debts included three credit cards 
(Tr. 42-45; SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.d, 2.f), two telecommunications accounts (Tr. 40, 45; SOR ¶¶ 
2.a, 2.g), purchase of an air conditioning unit (Tr. 44; SOR ¶ 2.e), a department store 
account (Tr. 46-47; SOR ¶ 2.j), and three jewelry store accounts (Tr. 43-46; SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 
2.h, 2.i). He contacted a debt consolidation company about three weeks before his 
hearing; however, their proposed plan was too expensive (Tr. 40-42). The debts in SOR 
¶¶ 2.b ($508) and 2.d ($218) are duplications of each other.  
 
Applicant made some progress on non-SOR listed debts (Tr. 41). In November 
2008, he made five mortgage payments of $974 each to bring his mortgage into current 
status (GE 3). He has subsequently maintained his mortgage in current status (Tr. 41). 
He also paid a non-SOR listed medical debt for about $100 (Tr. 41). At the time of his 
separation from his spouse in 2006, she made about $15,000 to $25,000 per year (Tr. 
48). Applicant’s monthly salary is about $5,500, and his monthly deductions total about 
$1,338 (Tr. 48). After paying monthly expenses (including child support), about $820 
remains (Tr. 48-52). He also provides money to his children (Tr. 52-53). For example he 
gave his eldest daughter $700 in March 2009 (Tr. 53). He has not paid any of his SOR 
creditors anything in 2008 or 2009 (Tr. 54).   
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
 
 
4 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).     
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
 
5 
                                           
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and F (Financial Considerations) 
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);2  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b) and 25(c) apply because Applicant used cocaine in 
approximately 1999 or 2000 and methamphetamine in about October 2006.3 He 
 
2AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
3AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Cocaine and methamphetamine are Schedule II Controlled Substances. See 21 U.S.C § 
812(c)II(a)(4) (cocaine), and II(c) (methamphetamine); United States v. McCourty, 562 F.3d 458 (2nd Cir. 
2008) (cocaine); United States v. Wheeler, 535 F.3d 446 (6th Cir. 2008) (methamphetamine). See also 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                            
disclosed his methamphetamine use on his security clearance application. He admitted 
his methamphetamine and cocaine use to an OPM investigator, and at his hearing. He 
used illegal drugs primarily because of stress. He possessed these illegal drugs before 
he used them. His cocaine use was detected by his employer’s drug test. The other 
disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable. 
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, “Commonly Abused Drugs,” available at 
http://www.drugabuse.gov/drugpages.html. 
 
 
7 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”4 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in October 2006, about 31 
months prior to his hearing. His overall illegal drug use was relatively brief, and involved 
two or three cocaine uses and one methamphetamine use. The absence of evidence of 
more recent or extensive drug use, his offer to submit to random urinalysis testing, and 
his promise not to use illegal drugs in the future eliminates doubts about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug 
use.5   
   
                                           
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has disassociated from his drug-using associates and 
contacts. He has broken or reduced the prevalence of his patterns of drug abuse, and 
he has changed his own life with respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug 
abuse for about 31 months. However, he did not provide “a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs after being prescribed those drugs for an illness or injury. The 
cocaine and methamphetamines were never prescribed for him. Although he did 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
5In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
 
8 
                                           
satisfactorily complete a prescribed drug treatment program after being caught using 
cocaine, he subsequently used methamphetamine. Moreover, he did not provide proof 
of a “favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional” as required in AG ¶ 
26(d). 
  
In sum, Applicant ended his relatively isolated drug abuse in October 2006, about 
31 months ago.6 His illegal drug use is not recent. The motivations to stop using illegal 
drugs are evident. He understands the adverse results from drug abuse.7  He promised 
not to use illegal drugs in the future, and offered to submit to random urinalysis tests to 
verify his abstinence from drug use. Drug involvement security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6The Appeal Board has reversed decisions granting a clearance because the administrative 
judge considered individual acts of misconduct one-by-one and determined the isolated acts were 
mitigated. ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006). Here, Applicant used 
cocaine in 1999/2000 and methamphetamine in October 2006. His repeated abuse of these particular 
drugs is relevant in the whole person analysis, but individually, as listed in the SOR, the abuse of two 
illegal drugs, cocaine about nine years ago, and methamphetamine about 31 months ago is insufficiently 
aggravating to cause denial of his clearance. In ISCR Case No. 07-03431 at 4 (App. Bd. June 27, 2008), 
the Appeal Board explained it is the overall conduct that determines whether a clearance should be 
granted stating: 
 
The Judge's analysis of the numerous acts of misconduct in this record failed to reflect a 
reasonable interpretation of the record evidence as a whole.  By analyzing each category 
of incidents separately, the Judge failed to consider the significance of the “evidence as a 
whole” and Applicant's pattern of conduct. See, e.g., Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860, 
866 (2d Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). Under the whole person concept, a 
Judge must consider the totality of Applicant's conduct when deciding whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0350 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 31, 1999). The Judge’s 
piecemeal analysis of Applicant's overall conduct did not satisfy the requirements of ¶ 
E2.2 of the Directive. 
 
See also ISCR Case No. 04-07714 at 5-7 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2006), see Whole Person Concept 
at pages 11-12, infra.  
 
7Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
9 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, in his 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, in his OPM interview, in his SOR response and at 
his hearing. His SOR listed 10 delinquent debts totaling about $10,933. The debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.d are duplications of each other, and I find For Applicant with respect 
to the debt in SOR ¶ 2.d, reducing the delinquent debt total by $218. His financial 
difficulties began in 2006 and continue today. The government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(e) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant receives partial 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because his financial problems “occurred under such 
circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur” because of his divorce; however, there is 
 
 
10 
                                           
some residual doubt about whether he is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is making adequate steps to do so.   
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged due in 
part to his marital problems, his daughter’s behavioral problems and stress. He provided 
support for his three children. He may have lacked sufficient income to pay some of his 
debts. He does not receive full credit because many of his SOR debts arose years ago, 
and he has made very little recent progress on their resolution.8  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant understands what he has to do to resolve 
his delinquent debts without financial counseling. Applicant has taken positive action to 
bring his mortgage to current status. He also makes his car payments and manages to 
pay his day-to-day living expenses. There are some positive “indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has also established some mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d) because Applicant showed some good faith9 in the resolution of his 
non-SOR mortgage debt and other non-SOR debts and expenses. However, he was 
unable to resolve his SOR debts. He did not prove that he had agreements or even 
attempted to reach agreements with his SOR creditors to accept minimal payments to 
keep his SOR debts in current status. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant did 
not dispute any SOR debts.  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He did not make any payments on any 
SOR debts in 2008 and 2009, even though most of his SOR debts are less than $1,000 
each. He has not presented sufficient evidence of attempts to generate payment plans 
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
11 
to resolve his SOR debts. His efforts to resolve his SOR debts are simply inadequate to 
fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant deserves substantial credit for his support to his 
country and his family. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States, the 
Department of Defense, his employer and that he is an honorable person. There were 
no allegations of security violations. He had only one arrest and it did not result in a 
conviction. Applicant is a high school graduate, and has about one year of college. He 
served on active duty in the Air Force for four years and two years in the reserves. 
Stress from marital problems and problems with his daughter contributed to his financial 
woes and to his poor decisions to use cocaine and methamphetamine. He received 
some stress-related counseling. His employer provided some drug therapy after cocaine 
was found in a urine sample he provided in a drug test. He understands how to avoid 
future delinquent debts. He paid his mortgage and other expenses of daily living. He is 
current on many of his financial responsibilities. He is motivated to have a successful 
career as an employee of a Department of Defense contractor, to pay his delinquent 
debts and to have his security clearance approved. These factors show some 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a lengthy history of financial problems. His SOR lists nine, 
valid delinquent debts totaling about $10,700. His financial difficulties began in 2006 
 
 
12 
and continue today. He had ample opportunity to contact more of his SOR creditors and 
to make greater progress in the resolution of his SOR debts. He did not make any 
payments on these nine delinquent debts in 2008 or 2009. He made insufficient 
progress over the last 16 months to resolve his delinquent debts, even though he had 
steady employment and ample opportunity to contact his creditors and provide 
documentation. He was on clear notice from his OPM interview and receipt of DOHA 
interrogatories and even more so after he received the SOR that he needed to show 
substantial progress in the resolution of his delinquent debts; however, he made 
insufficient effort to accomplish this security responsibility.      
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. I take this position based on 
the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful 
consideration of the whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  
responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the 
government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d: For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK W. HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
