 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 08-00984 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  John Sapienza, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, and 
after a whole person analysis that considered all relevant and material evidence, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under the   
Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence adjudicative guidelines. Her eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
On December 5, 2006, Applicant signed and certified a Security Clearance 
Application (SF-86). On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. On March 3, 2009, the case was 
assigned to me. I convened a hearing on April 8, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced three exhibits (Ex.), 
which were marked as Applicant’s Ex. 1 through 3, and admitted to the record without 
objection. The Government also offered facts in ten official U.S. government documents   
for administrative notice. (HE I.) Applicant did not object to administrative notice of facts 
in the Government’s documents. Applicant introduced ten exhibits, which were marked 
as Ex. A through J. Exs. A through H and Ex. J were admitted to the record without 
objection. Ex. I was admitted conditionally, pending Applicant’s submission of an 
English translation of the document.  Applicant called one witness and testified on her 
own behalf. 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business 
April 15, 2009, so that Applicant could, if she wished, submit additional information. 
Applicant timely submitted  an English translation of Ex. I and three additional Exhibits, 
which were marked Ex. K, Ex. L, and Ex. M and admitted to the record without 
objection.  On April 21, Applicant submitted an additional document, which was marked 
Ex. N and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of 
the hearing on April 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of a security concern under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and four allegations that raise security concerns under 
AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR, with explanation. Applicant’s admissions 
are admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old, married, and the mother of two school-aged children.   
She is employed as an Arabic linguist by a government contractor. In this capacity, she 
has worked as a federal contractor since 2006. She seeks a security clearance. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Algeria. She was educated in French and 
Arabic, and she received a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine degree from a university in 
Algeria.  However, because she was a woman and lacked helpful political connections, 
she was unable to find employment in her profession. She acquired a job as an 
administrative assistant with an international company in Algiers and studied English. 
 
3 
 
 
After she acquired proficiency in English, she acquired a job with the U.S. Embassy in 
Algiers, where she worked for about a year. (Ex. 1; Ex. H; Ex. I; Tr.65-68.) 
 
 While she was employed at the Embassy, Applicant met the man who became 
her husband. Applicant and her husband, a U.S. military security guard, were married in 
the United States in 1998. Applicant’s husband is a native-born U.S. citizen; their two 
children are also native-born U.S. citizens. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in 2004. Her husband, now a civilian, is employed in security. (Ex. 1; Ex. A; Tr. 49-50, 
60-62, 70.)   
 
 In 2007, in order to avoid requesting and paying for an Algerian visa when she 
traveled to Algeria to visit her parents, Applicant renewed her Algerian passport. The 
renewed passport had an expiration date of 2012. Applicant was not aware that her dual 
citizenship with Algeria might create security concerns. When she learned of the 
government’s possible security concerns, she surrendered her Algerian passport in 
March 2009 to her company’s security specialist, for safekeeping.  On April 15, 2009, 
Applicant requested that the security officer return the passport to her. She then 
surrendered her passport to a responsible official of the Algerian government, who 
acknowledged receipt of her passport in a written document.  (Ex. A; Ex. K; Ex. L; Ex. 
N; Tr. 80-81.)  
  
 Applicant is the oldest of six children. Her parents are citizens and residents of 
Algeria. They were married when Applicant’s mother was 14 years old and her father 
was 27 years old. Applicant’s father is a retired national police officer, and her mother, 
also retired, was a homemaker and dressmaker. In 2007, Applicant’s parents were 
divorced, and her father remarried. Applicant’s step-mother is a homemaker and 
approximately the same age as her mother. (Ex. 1; Tr. 70-72, 92, 95-96.) 
 
 Applicant has two brothers, both of whom reside in France.  One brother, a dual 
citizen of Algeria and France, is employed by a technical research organization in 
France. Applicant’s other brother, an Algerian citizen, is employed as a physician in 
France.  (Ex. 3; Tr. 75-77.) 
 
 Applicant also has three sisters.  One of her sisters is a dual citizen of the United 
States and Algeria and resides with her husband and children in the United States. A 
second sister is a citizen of Algeria and resides and works in another Middle Eastern 
country. The third sister, a student, is a citizen and resident of Algeria and resides with 
Applicant’s parents. (Ex. 3; Tr. 72-75.) 
 
 Other than her immediate family in Algeria, Applicant also has occasional contact 
with her grandmother and with an aunt, both citizens and residents of Algeria. She has 
occasional e-mail contact with the aunt and she goes to see her when she is in Algeria. 
(Tr. 78-79.) 
 
 When Applicant was a young adult in her parents’ household in Algeria, she and 
her family witnessed brutal acts of terrorism in their community. She lost family 
 
4 
 
 
members in terrorist bombings, and her own father and younger sister were targeted 
because, as police department employees, they worked against terrorists.  Because 
Applicant’s father has been retired for many years, he is no longer targeted by terrorists. 
Her sister no longer lives in Algeria, and she is no longer a target. (Tr. 63-64.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Algeria in 2001, 2002 and 2007. Now that Applicant, two of 
her brothers, and two of her sisters no longer live in Algeria, they find it more 
comfortable and convenient to avoid travel to Algeria and to meet, instead, in France or 
in another European country. In 2007, when Applicant’s parents were divorcing, 
Applicant and her siblings met in Europe to discuss how they would care for their 
mother after the divorce. Her two brothers in France now provide for their mother’s 
support.  Applicant and her sister who lives in the United States sometimes provide their 
mother with lesser amounts of money on an irregular basis. Last year, Applicant met her 
mother in France for a visit.  (Tr. 85-87, 98-100.) 
 
 Applicant is grateful for her opportunities as a U.S. citizen, and she believes her 
work for the government contractor who employs her has value in the war on terror. She 
stated: “It’s very important for me to know that I’m useful, and I do it also for the U.S., 
because this country has provided me with everything.” (Tr. 90-92.)    
 
 Applicant stated her fidelity to the United States as follows: “I love the USA and . 
. . I will never hurt its interests in any way, this country was good to me, it has offered 
me security, freedom and respect and I will never do anything to lose these privileges, 
never. “ (Ex. A.) 
 
 The Director of Applicant’s office, a retired officer with nearly 30 years of 
experience in the United States military, appeared as her personal representative and 
as a witness on her behalf. He held a high level security clearance, had served as a 
military attaché, and supported the intelligence community. He stated: 
 
I understand the Government’s concern with regard to particular countries 
in the world, and I understand the Government’s concern with regard to 
elements that operate within those countries.  However, in order for the 
United States government and the United States national security 
apparatus to gain intelligence and to conduct meaningful analysis on that 
intelligence, the only way to do it, the best way to do it, is using a source 
from that country. 
 
(Tr. 27.) 
 
 The Director characterized Applicant as “a gifted linguist and a wonderful 
employee” who performed her duties in a distinguished manner.  Her linguistic expertise 
in classical Arabic and in French, and her knowledge of North African cultures, enabled 
her to provide in-depth analyses of great value to senior-level policy makers. (Ex. D.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 An official of one of the entities served by Applicant’s Directorate offered the 
following evaluation of her character and her work: 
 
It is my pleasure to write this letter of reference for [Applicant] in 
acknowledgement of her dedication to her profession and in the service of 
the United States Government.  During my long professional association 
with [Applicant], she has consistently demonstrated the highest levels of 
commitment in providing mission critical support on substantive issues on 
North Africa, to include counterterrorism-related projects. [Applicant] has 
worked tirelessly to ensure that analysts and policymakers have received 
accurate and timely information while preparing her reports and 
translations. [Applicant’s] in-depth knowledge of linguistic and cultural 
matters has proven invaluable to our customers, particularly given the 
current shortage of real expertise in Middle East study disciplines. 
[Applicant] has demonstrated discretion while working on projects and 
may be relied upon to use good judgment when supporting a variety of US 
Government and military customers. 
 
To my knowledge, there are no issues of concern that would reflect 
negatively upon [Applicant’s] character or her dedication to the United 
States and its interests.  I recommend her without hesitation for a position 
of trust.  
 
(Ex. J.)  
   
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Algeria, as provided by 
Department Counsel from official documents of the United States government1: 
 
Algeria is a multi-party constitutional republic that has suffered from 
domestic terrorism throughout the 1990s and into the present. The 
Algerian government declared a state of emergency in 1992, which 
remains in effect to the present day, due to what government authorities 
 
1 The documents from which these facts are drawn are as follows:  Algeria, Country Specific Information, 
United States Department of State, dated November 10, 2008 (4 pages); Background Note: Algeria, 
United States Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, dated October 2007 (11 pages); 
Travel Warning: Algeria, United States Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, dated August 22, 
2008 (2 pages); Country Reports on Terrorism: Chapter 2 - Country Reports: Middle East and North 
Africa Overview, United States Department of State, dated April 30, 2008 (24 pages); Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices – 2007: Algeria, United States Department of State, dated March 11, 2008 (18 
pages); Algeria: Current Issues, Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, Library of 
Congress, dated April 24, 2007 (6 pages); Press Statement, U.S. Condemns Terrorist Attacks, United 
States Department of State, released and dated April 11, 2007 (1 page); Statement for the Record: 
National Counterintelligence Executive, The Honorable Michelle Van Cleave before the House Judiciary 
Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security & Claims, dated September 15, 2005 (9 pages); Annual 
Threat Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence for the Senate Armed Services Committee, 
dated February 27, 2008 (45 pages); and The National Counterintelligence Strategy of the United States 
of America, 2007 (13 pages). 
 
6 
 
 
call ‘persistent terrorism.’ Although making modest efforts toward 
democratic progress, Algeria’s 16-year-old state of emergency has been 
reportedly used to justify governmental abuses of human rights.  
According to a 2007 United States Department of State report on human 
rights practices in Algeria, the government continued to fail to account for 
thousands of persons who disappeared in detention in the 1990s. Further, 
there were other significant human rights violations regarding abuse and 
torture, corruption and lack of government transparency, official impunity, 
prolonged pre-trial detention, as well as other due process issues.  
Restrictions of civil liberties such as privacy, freedom of speech, press, 
assembly, association and movement were also recorded, as were 
limitation on religious freedom, including increased regulation of non-
Muslim worship. Gender discrimination and abuse, restrictions on workers’ 
rights, child abuse, and human trafficking were also recorded among the 
human rights violations in Algeria. 
 
Although the United States seeks to support the recent democratic efforts 
in Algeria, the U.S. Government has become increasingly concerned with 
the changing nature of terrorism in Algeria and its global effects.  What 
was once primarily domestic terrorism aimed at Algerian government 
infrastructure has expanded to an affiliation with Al-Qaeda and 
international targets. 
 
Approximately 35 known and suspected terrorist organizations throughout 
the world currently target the United States for intelligence gathering.  Of 
these, Al-Qaeda is the terrorist organization that presents the greatest 
threat to U.S. interests, including the Homeland. Al-Qaeda continues to 
plot attacks against the United States and maintains active connections 
with affiliates throughout the Middle Ease and northern Africa, now to 
include Algeria.  Moreover, terrorist threats to the United States remain the 
pre-eminent challenge to the Intelligence Community, both operationally 
and analytically. 
 
A recent upsurge in terrorist attacks has only increase the U.S. 
Government concerns. Within Algeria, terrorist groups have targeted 
foreigners and remained active around the southern regions and borders 
of the country where approximately 1,100 American citizens live and work 
in oil and gas fields. 
 
Although the United States has worked with the Algerian government to 
help combat terrorism in that country, the Algerian government projects 
inconsistent policies regarding its position on international terrorism, which 
are often in conflict with the United States.  Despite publicly condemning 
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States by Al-
Qaeda, as well as condemning international terrorism, Algerian officials 
distinguish between terrorism and what they consider to be legitimate 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
armed resistance by recognized terrorist groups such as Hamas, 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hizballah in the Palestinian occupied 
territories. Moreover, Algeria is now considered to be a source of 
international terrorists, and many Algerian terrorists have been arrested in 
counter-terrorism operations in Europe and the United States. 2  
  
(HE 1, footnotes omitted.)  
        Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
2 I recognize that terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence 
services. 
 
8 
 
 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These potentially disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 After becoming a U.S. citizen in 2004, Applicant renewed her Algerian passport 
in 2007. She did this to avoid purchasing a visa to enter Algeria with her U.S. passport 
and to make travel to Algeria more convenient in the future.  She did not know that 
acquiring an Algerian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen might raise security 
concerns under Guideline C. Applicant’s possession of an active Algerian passport  
raises a security concern under AG ¶ 10(a)(1). 
 
 There is one Foreign Preference mitigating condition that could apply in this 
case. If an individual’s passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated, then AG ¶ 11(e) might be applicable. On 
April 21, 2009, Applicant provided DOHA with notice that she had surrendered her 
Algerian passport to an appropriate authority of the Algerian government. In addition, 
she filed a copy of a letter from the Algerian authority acknowledging her surrender of 
her Algerian passport.  I conclude that AG ¶ 11(e) applies to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Official U.S. government documents provided by Department Counsel 
emphasize that the United States supports the efforts of Algeria toward a more 
democratic government. The United States recognizes that Algeria is not a state 
sponsor of terrorism, is battling an increase in international terrorism within its borders, 
and is aware of the ascendency of Al-Qaeda and its operatives within the country. The 
Algerian government does not target U.S. citizens in order to obtain classified 
information from them.  However, despite the government of Algeria’s actions to 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
suppress domestic and international terrorist groups within its borders, the threat of 
terrorism remains and terrorist groups threaten U.S. interests in Algeria. 
 
 Additionally, the U.S. government recognizes that Algeria has carried out human 
rights abuses against its own citizens. The government’s human rights abuses include   
torture, prolonged pre-trial detention, and government corruption.    
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline. Applicant admitted the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.b., but she provided information 
that one of her two younger sisters is no longer a resident of Algeria but resides in 
another Middle Eastern country.  
 
Applicant admitted the government’s factual allegations that her parents are 
citizens and residents of Algeria; that one of her brothers is a dual citizen of Algeria and 
France and works for an organization funded by the French government; and that 
Applicant had traveled to Algeria in 2001, 2002, and 2007 to visit her family members 
there. She partially rebutted the allegation that two of her younger sisters are citizens 
and residents of Algeria by providing information that one of the sisters is no longer 
living in Algeria. These facts raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”3 AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a foreign 
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”   
 
 When Applicant admitted these allegations, the burden shifted to her to mitigate 
the resulting security concerns. Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be 
applicable to Applicant’s case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, 
the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  
If “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens 
 
3 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb.8, 2001). 
 
11 
 
 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation,” then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  
 
 Applicant is a dutiful daughter, and she has strong filial relationships with her 
parents and siblings. She stays in contact with her parents and with her siblings in 
Algeria and France and is concerned about their well-being. Her relationship with her 
family members in Algeria and France is based on long-standing family ties of affection 
and obligation.  
 
 Algeria cooperates with the United States in combating terrorism. The 
government of Algeria does not target U.S. citizens to acquire protected information. 
The positions and activities of Applicant’s family members in Algeria do not involve the 
government or the military, and they would have no interest in acquiring protected 
information.  Only their physical presence in Algeria creates the potential that Applicant 
would confront a choice between their interests and the security interests of the United 
States. Thus, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application. 
 
 Applicant produced significant evidence establishing mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(b). Based on her relationship and depth of loyalty to the United States, she can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. She has committed 
to a life as a U.S. citizen. She is married to a U.S. citizen, and she and her husband are 
raising their children as U.S. citizens. Significantly, Applicant sought work as an Arabic 
linguist and translator in order to assist the U.S. in its efforts to combat international 
terrorism and protect the homeland. Her supervisors attest to her unique abilities as a 
Arab linguist, translator, and expert on North African cultural matters. 
 
 Applicant was unable to establish the applicability of mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(c). Her contacts with her parents are familial and intense. While perhaps sporadic, her 
relationships with her brothers were on-going and familial and focused on providing for 
the well-being of her mother.  Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) cannot be given full application. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
12 
 
 
                                           
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Two 
circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. First, even though 
Algeria is an ally of the United States, it has committed serious human rights abuses 
against its own citizens, and there is a serious problem with terrorists in Algeria. 
Second, three of Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens and residents of 
Algeria, raising the possibility that they could be subject to such abuses or to coercion 
by terrorists, which could raise security concerns for Applicant. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance.  Out of a sense of patriotism and love for the United States, Applicant sought 
work as an Arab-speaking linguist. She provides vital information to officials on terrorist 
operations in North Africa.  Nothing in her record suggests that she has ever taken an 
action that would cause potential harm to the United States. She takes her loyalty to the 
United States seriously. As noted previously, Applicant has strong familial connections 
to the United States, and these connections are more substantial than her connections 
to her family members living in Algeria. Those who have witnessed her work as an Arab 
linguist and translator assessed her as trustworthy, conscientious, responsible, and 
dedicated.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s commendable 
performance as an Arab linguist and translator, I conclude Applicant has fully mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence.4 Overall, 
the record evidence leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guidelines C and B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
 
4 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Assuming that a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 11 and AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the 
whole person analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case.  
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B   FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is   
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
