1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03617
SSN: ------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised under
Guidelines F, Financial Considerations. Clearance is denied.
On October 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2009. On February 17, 2009, a Notice of
Hearing was issued originally scheduling the case for March 2, 2009. The hearing was
continued because of inclement weather, and rescheduled for April 6, 2009. It was then
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l are duplicates.1
2
held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received six government exhibits, six Applicant
exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant and her husband. The transcript was received
on April 15, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old married woman with one child, age nine, and one
stepchild, age 16. She has an associate’s degree in mechanical engineering
technology. Currently, she works for a defense contractor as a marine designer.
Applicant owes creditors approximately 14,000 in delinquent debt. Her financial
problems coincided with her 1997 wedding. She and her husband borrowed money
from two creditors to finance the wedding reception, and purchase furniture for their new
home (Exhibit 5 at 3).  Shortly after the wedding, Applicant lost her job (Tr. 13). Both the
wedding loan and the furniture loan, as listed in SOR ¶¶ 1f and 1.j, grew delinquent.
Applicant was underemployed for several months, working a number of part-time
jobs. By 1999, she had obtained a full-time job (Tr. 14). Later that year, she became
pregnant. The pregnancy was difficult, requiring bed rest for the last month before her
child’s birth, and periodic hospitalizations. The child was born with serious health
problems that required extensive medical treatment and hospitalization for both the child
and Applicant (Exhibit 5 at 3).
Approximately eight months elapsed before the medical problems of Applicant’s
child stabilized. Applicant was unable to work during this time, and lost her job. Between
2000 and 2002, she lacked health insurance (Exhibit 5 at 3). Her struggle to pay her
medical bills exacerbated her financial problems. By 2002, more debts grew delinquent
including bills for her 1999 hospitalizations (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e), and another credit card
bill (SOR 1.c).1
During this time, Applicant also fell behind on her car note. In 2003, her
automobile was repossessed, (Exhibit 4 at 15). In March 2003, a judgment for the
deficiency was entered against her in the amount of $4,572 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
In 2004, after approximately three years of working for a temporary employment
agency, Applicant began working for her current employer. After successfully
completing an apprenticeship, she became a salaried employer in 2006 (Tr. 15).
Although Applicant’s income increased, she was unable to make any progress in
satisfying the SOR delinquencies. Shortly after her current employer hired her,
Applicant’s daughter had two surgeries to repair a cleft palate, and remove a nasal
deformity (Exhibit 5 at 2). Although Applicant had health insurance by this time, it did not
cover all of the bills (Id.). Consequently, several more medical bills grew delinquent
(SOR ¶¶ 1.g -1.i).
3
Also, in 2005, Applicant’s brother-in-law and his family moved into her home
(Exhibit 5 at 3). For approximately seven months while her husband was unemployed,
she was supporting both her family and her brother-in-law’s family solely on her income
(Id.).
In May 2008, Applicant created a debt payment plan to satisfy a debt not listed
on the SOR (Exhibit E). Between May and November of 2008, she made monthly
payments ranging between $29 and $80 (Id.). She did not complete the payment
schedule, and continues to owe approximately $650.
In June 2008, Applicant wrote letters proposing payment plans to each of the
creditors listed in the SOR (Exhibit 4 at 11-15). In November 2008, she met with a
financial counselor (Tr. 42). After the meeting, Applicant developed a payment plan
which consolidated the individual plans set forth in her earlier correspondence to the
SOR creditors (Exhibit D). Under the plan, she was to have satisfied all of the
delinquencies by June 2009. 
Applicant made one payment, consistent with the plan, satisfying a judgment
owed to a local municipality (Exhibit F). She made no additional payments. She
attributes her inability to execute the payment plan to an unexpectedly large increase in
her utility bill (Tr. 42). 
Applicant maintains a budget (Tr. 40). She has approximately $585 of monthly
after-expense income. Currently, her mortgage payments are approximately two months
behind (Id.).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant satisfied SOR ¶ 1(a) in June 2006. I conclude it no longer
represents a security concern. The remaining delinquencies, however, trigger the
application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s delinquencies were caused by a series of family medical problems,
and several episodes of underemployment. Once these problems stabilized, Applicant
experienced more setbacks including the relocation of her brother-in-law’s family to her
home, and a rapid, unexpected increase in her utility bills. She responded by writing
creditors, consulting with a financial counselor, and developing payment plans. AG ¶¶
20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances,” and 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply.
Although Applicant deserves credit for confronting her delinquencies, her efforts,
thus far, have been unsuccessful. Also, her mortgage payments have recently fallen
behind. Consequently, I cannot conclude that AG ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control,” applies.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
5
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Applicant’s financial delinquencies were caused by an extraordinary series of
misfortunes. She has attempted to get them under control by crafting a budget and
developing payment plans. Moreover, she deserves credit for obtaining her current job,
and successfully completing its internship program.
Applicant was unable, however, to adhere to her payment plans. Absent a
demonstrated track record of financial reform, future promises to pay debts have limited
probative value. Consequently, her financial problems remain a security concern
regardless of the emotionally compelling circumstances surrounding their accrual. 
Upon considering the disqualifying and mitigating conditions together with the
whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial
Considerations security concern. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b - 1.l: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
