 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08858 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On December 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 26, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on February 27, 2009. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 19, 2009. As of May 8, 2009, 
he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
degree, which was awarded in March 2008. He is married and has a four-year-old 
child.1  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana in about 1986. He estimated that he 
smoked marijuana about ten times before he entered high school in 1988. He smoked 
marijuana on a weekly or monthly basis during the four years he was in high school. 
From the time he graduated high school in 1992 through July 2002, he smoked 
marijuana on a daily or weekly basis depending on its availability. He stopped smoking 
marijuana in July 2002.2   
 
 Applicant applied for a security clearance in March 2003. He was interviewed for 
his background investigation in April 2003. He started smoking marijuana again in about 
June 2003. He would smoke marijuana at home with his wife. His security clearance 
was denied in January 2004 because of his drug use. He smoked marijuana on a 
monthly and occasionally weekly basis until January 2004, when he and his wife 
stopped smoking marijuana prior to the conception of their child. The child was born in 
December 2004.3 
 
 Applicant and his wife did not smoke marijuana while their child was nursing. 
They started smoking marijuana again in about May 2006, after the child was no longer 
nursing. He smoked marijuana again on a monthly and occasionally weekly basis. He 
also took methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), which is known as ecstasy, on 
two different occasions in 2007. Applicant and his wife again decided to stop smoking 
marijuana in about April 2008, when their child was three years old. Their child was 
getting to the age that the child could understand what they were doing, and they 
wanted to set a good example for the child. They also decided to have another child, 
which further reinforced their decision.4  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that his drug use cost him a clearance which has 
hindered his options for job advancement. He indicated that he does not intend to use 
illegal drugs in the future no matter the outcome of this process. He still has a few 
friends that have used drugs in the past. He is uncertain if they still use drugs. His 
contact with those friends is minimal and he does not frequent places where drugs are 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 3, 5. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
used. He is willing to undergo any form of drug testing to ensure that he remains drug-
free.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), and 
certified that his answers were true on June 13, 2008. Section 24b asked: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that between “01/2001 (Estimated)” and “01/2008 
(Estimated)” he used marijuana 21 times. He added that it was “[o]ccasional usage 3-4 
times a year over the date period indicated. None since that time.”6 He did not list his 
ecstasy use in 2007. He underreported the frequency of his marijuana use and he 
misstated the last time he used marijuana. In his response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted to SOR ¶ 4.a, which alleged that he intentionally falsified the SF 86 by omitting 
his ecstasy use.7 He did not respond to the FORM in which Department Counsel 
specifically commented that Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86. After considering 
all the evidence, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 by omitting his 
ecstasy use. 
 
 Applicant revealed his full drug use when he responded to DOHA interrogatories 
on November 12, 2008.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
5 Item 4. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 There is no paragraph 3 in the SOR. The SOR does not allege that Applicant falsified the SOR 
by underreporting his marijuana use. It only alleges that he did not disclose that he used ecstasy. The 
underreporting of his marijuana use will not be used for disqualification purposes. It is considered as 
circumstantial evidence on whether he intentionally falsified the SF 86 by omitting his ecstasy use. 
 
8 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
5 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession9 and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 
25(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana at a young age and used it regularly for 
years. He stopped smoking marijuana in about July 2002, before he applied for a 
security clearance in March 2003. He started smoking marijuana again in about June 
2003, after he was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2003. His 
security clearance was denied in January 2004 because of his drug use. He and his 
wife stopped smoking marijuana again around the same time period, which was prior to 
the conception of their child. They started smoking marijuana again in about May 2006, 
after their child was no longer nursing. He regularly smoked marijuana and used 
ecstasy on two occasions until he stopped using drugs in April 2008. Their child was 
getting to the age that the child could understand what they were doing and they wanted 
to set a good example. They also decided to have another child, which further 
reinforced their decision. Applicant also realized that his drug use had adversely 
                                                          
9 Drugs must be possessed in order to be used. 
 
 
6 
 
affected his career. He indicated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future 
no matter the outcome of this process, and he is willing to undergo any form of drug 
testing to ensure that he remains drug-free. 
 
 There is no bright-line rule as to whether conduct is recent. Applicant has not 
used illegal drugs in about 13 months. However, his drug use was very extensive; 
occurred over a long period of time; and was interrupted by other periods of abstinence 
followed by additional drug use. I am unable to make a determination that illegal drug 
use is completely in his past. His drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable. Applicant has 
indicated a firm intent not to abuse drugs in the future. He does not receive full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale discussed above. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
It is a criminal offense to possess and use marijuana and MDMA. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant violated the law every time he used illegal drugs. His last use was 
about in April 2008. He intentionally provided false information on his SF 86 in June 
2008, which constituted a federal crime. His criminal acts cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. There is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation at 
this time to find any mitigating condition applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in June 2008. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable 
as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant revealed his full drug use when he responded to DOHA interrogatories 
on November 12, 2008. While he receives credit for finally being honest, that is 
insufficient to establish a mitigating condition. I find that no mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant used illegal drugs for many years. He underreported his drug use on his SF 
86. While he appears sincere in his statement that he does not intend to use drugs 
again, he had previous periods of abstinence followed by drug use. It is also difficult to 
gauge true sincerity from the written word. He appears to be on the right track, but at 
this time, concerns remain about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
