KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A review of the entire record discloses no basis to conclude that Applicant was denied
the rights due him under the Directive.  The record does not support a conclusion that the Judge
was biased against Applicant.  The Judge’s findings are supported by the record.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-04464.a1
DATE: 05/08/2009
DATE: May 8, 2009 
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-04464
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Judge’s favorable findings under SOR subparagraphs 1 (m) and (n) are not at issue in this appeal. 1
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 10, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 27, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process; whether
the Judge was biased against him; whether certain of the Judge’s findings of fact were erroneous;
and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is erroneous.   Finding no error, we1
affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an honorably
discharged veteran of the U.S. military.  He has worked for a government contractor since the mid-
2000s.  He experienced unemployment several years ago, when he quit his job to care for his ill wife.
In addition to unemployment, he has also had “domestic difficulties,” (Decision at 2) resulting from
a charge of domestic abuse.  While unemployed, he relied on savings to pay living expenses.
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts, for credit cards, consumer purchases, medical expenses,
etc.  Applicant advised creditors of his poor financial circumstances and of his intent to file for
bankruptcy protection.  He did not file for bankruptcy, however, and, at the close of the record, had
an annual income of around $115,000, with $29,000 in savings.  He has not advised his creditors of
his improved economic circumstances.  In holding against Applicant, the Judge stated that Applicant
has not demonstrated “that he understood his financial responsibilities or how to resolve them.  He
appear[s] not to understand the basics of keeping track of expenses and budgeting, leading to a
conclusion that he could experience financial difficulties in the future.  Additionally, he had no plan
in place to systematically resolve his delinquent debt and prepare for future contingencies.  While
his unemployment caused unexpected hardships, he failed to deal responsibly with them.”  Decision
at 8-9.     
Concerning the allegation of a due process violation, Applicant was advised of his right to
employ counsel, or to have some other person represent him at the hearing; his right to present
evidence and witnesses; his right to cross-examine witnesses against him; and his right to object to
evidence.  At the hearing, Applicant submitted numerous pieces of documentary evidence; testified
in his own behalf, and objected to various documents submitted by the Government.  A review of
the entire record discloses no basis to conclude that Applicant was denied the rights due him under
the Directive or that he had not been adequately advised of those rights.  ISCR Case No. 08-03110
at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 2009).  Applicant’s brief, which in part is a denunciation of the Judge, alleges
that she was biased against him.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and
unbiased, and a party seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See,
e. g., ISCR Case No. 07- 02253 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2008); ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 4 (App.
Bd. May 14, 2004).  Applicant’s complaints against the Judge appear, in large measure, to be
disagreements with her weighing of the evidence or with her evidentiary rulings.  The record does
not support a conclusion that Applicant has met his burden of persuasion on this issue.  
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) Among other things, Applicant argued that one of the debts
alleged in the SOR which the Judge found against him was actually a repetition of another.  The
Judge’s finding on this matter is a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence.  Even if the
finding is in error, the error is harmless.  Applicant also states that the Judge erred in failing to note
that he had been acquitted of the domestic abuse charge.  Again, this is at most harmless error.  See
ISCR 01-23362 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006) for discussion of harmless error doctrine.  Applicant  argues
that one of the debts alleged in the SOR is actually  his brother’s.  However, a review of the record
demonstrates that Applicant asked his brother to include Applicant’s name on the account in order
to “boost up” Applicant’s credit rating.  Tr. at 125.  The Judge’s adverse finding on this matter is
sustainable.  
Applicant states that the Judge did not consider all the record evidence.  However, a Judge
is presumed to have considered all the evidence, and Applicant has not supplied a basis to rebut that
presumption.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-
00553 at 2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2008).  Applicant’s reliance upon portions of the Adjudicative Desk
Reference (ADR) is misplaced.  DOHA judges are required to decide cases by using the Adjudicative
Guidelines, not the ADR.  The ADR itself contains language indicating that it may not be cited as
authority for denial or suspension of access.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-02253 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar.
28, 2008).
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with national
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision
at 10.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard
is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security’”). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
