                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01473 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 22, 2008, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on January 31, 2009. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant on February 11, 2009, and it was received on March 6, 2009. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, as a machinist, since June 2007. Prior to then he was employed with various 
companies since 1996. He had two periods of unemployment from September 2006 to 
March 2007 and February 2002 to May 2002. Applicant served in the Air Force for four 
years and was honorably discharged. He was married and divorced from 1998 to 2002, 
from 1976 to 1983, and from 1970 to 1973. He has three grown children.1 
 
 Applicant has three delinquent debts listed in the SOR totaling $37,720. 
Applicant has not made any payments on these debts because he does not have the 
money.2  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are to the same creditor. One is for a signature 
loan and one is for a car loan. Applicant does not know which debt applies to the 
different loans. The signature loan was opened jointly with his wife in 2000. The original 
balance was $10,000. It was taken out to pay taxes and miscellaneous bills. He and his 
wife then went through a divorce and he could not get information on the loan because 
it was opened with his wife’s credit union under her account number, even though it was 
a joint loan. It became delinquent in July 2002. Applicant does not know the status of 
this debt and does not have any agreement to pay the debt. 
 
 The other debt is a car loan. It was opened in January 1999, and the original loan 
was for approximately $32,000. It was opened jointly with Applicant’s wife and became 
delinquent in approximately December 2002. Applicant was divorced in July 2002 and 
was unable to keep current on the loan for a few months and eventually had difficulty 
paying all of his bills. The vehicle was repossessed in January 2003. At the time it was 
repossessed he believed the balance on the loan was $8,000 to $9,000. Applicant did 
not receive any correspondence on this account since the repossession. He does not 
have any agreement to pay this debt.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is for a car loan. Applicant signed a loan for a car for his 
daughter because she was unable to get a loan. His daughter was to make the monthly 
payments. The account was opened in January 2003. Applicant believed the original 
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
amount of the loan was $23,000. His daughter made a few payments and then 
defaulted on the loan. Applicant tried to return the car to the creditor, but his daughter 
had given the car to her ex-husband and Applicant could not locate it. Applicant could 
not make the payments on the car and received repossession notices from the creditor. 
Sometime in 2003 the car was impounded and the driver of the car was arrested for an 
outstanding warrant. Approximately 13 months after the car was impounded Applicant 
received a notice from a collection company requesting payment of $18,000 for the car. 
He later received a settlement offer for $9,000. He notified the collection company he 
could not pay the amount. Applicant has not made any attempt to repay the loan. 
  
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on October 26, 2007. He stated he intended to pay all of his 
delinquent debts and would file for bankruptcy if he was unable to make the payments. 
He stated he started a new job and a new life in a different state. He stated all of his 
monthly bills were current.3  
 
 Applicant provided a statement explaining his debts became delinquent due to 
his divorce and they were incurred when he was living in a two income household. In his 
statement Applicant refers to another long-term debt he is currently paying. He stated 
he would like to pay his delinquent debts but does not earn enough money. No other 
information was provided.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts totaling $37,720 that he incurred years ago and 
remain unpaid. He has not taken any action to resolve the debts. Applicant does not 
have sufficient resources to pay the debts. I find both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant admits he owes all of the delinquent debts and they remain unpaid. 
Therefore, the debts are recent and based on Applicant’s financial situation I can not 
find the problem is unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
Applicant bought his daughter a car and she was required to make the payments on it. 
She failed to do so and because the car loan was in Applicant’s name he was 
responsible to pay the loan. He did not pay the loan. Applicant took out a loan to buy a 
car and took out a signature loan, both with his wife. They divorced and he could not 
pay these loans. These are conditions that were somewhat beyond his control. In order 
for mitigating condition (b) to be fully applicable Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant did not provide evidence to show he has taken any 
action to resolve these debts or made any payments towards them since he defaulted 
on them. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies. There is no evidence 
Applicant has received financial counseling or the problem is under control. There is 
also no evidence Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay his delinquent debts. I 
find none of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has three large delinquent 
debts that have remained unpaid for many years. Although he stated he intends to pay 
his delinquent debts he has not taken any action to do so. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to meet his burden of persuasion. I am unable to conclude Applicant 
has successfully mitigated the security concerns raised. Overall the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
