 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 08-05539
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concern that arises from his long
history of illegally using marijuana, most recently in November 2007.
On November 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing to Applicant its trustworthiness concerns.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on December 15, 2008. He
denied both SOR allegations and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2009. A notice of hearing was issued
on March 5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 23, 2009. The hearing was conducted
as scheduled. The government submitted three documentary exhibits that were marked
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted one documentary exhibit that was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit
(AE) 1 and admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open to provide
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation in support of his case. Two
documents were timely received, marked as AE 2 & 3 and admitted into the record without
objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum was marked as Appellate
Exhibit (App. Ex.) I and is included in the file. The transcript was received on May 4, 2009.
Procedural Matters
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR subparagraph 1.b.
That motion was allowed without objection.
Findings of Fact
After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 34 years old. He has been employed as a manager of billing and
enrollment by a defense contractor since November 2007. He was employed by a
manufacturing company outside the defense industry from April 1998 until November 2007.
His last position with that company was as a supervisor. 
Applicant attended college from 1992-97, but did not obtain a degree until 2002
because of an administrative issue at the college he attended. He completed his studies
at a junior college after he was married and had begun full-time employment. He received
a bachelor degree in economics in 2002. He was awarded a master’s degree in industrial
engineering in August 2006.
Applicant has been married since February 1996. He has three children, ages nine,
six and two. Applicant has known his wife since middle school and they began dating while
in college.
Applicant began using marijuana while in college. From early 1993 until about
December 1996, he smoked marijuana about two to three times a week. However, there
were also weeks during his college years when he did not smoke marijuana at all.
Applicant sometimes purchased marijuana and at other times used marijuana that had
been provided by friends.
Applicant was interviewed on April 16, 2008, at which time he stated he used
marijuana once a month to once every other month from 1996 until 2007. However, he also
stated there were some years during which he did not use marijuana at all. He testified his
use of marijuana from the time he left college until his last reported use in November 2007
was sporadic and infrequent. He again asserted that several years would pass by during
which he totally abstained from using marijuana. In the Questionnaire for Public Trust
Positions Applicant executed on November 16, 2007, he admitted he used marijuana four
times between November 2006 and November 2007.  
  Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.2
  Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.
3
 Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated4
November 19, 2004.
  Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
5
3
Applicant’s use of marijuana occurred in social settings. He used marijuana with co-
workers from his previous employer even though he was a supervisor. He denies he ever
used marijuana with his subordinates. Applicant’s last reported use of marijuana occurred
at his going-away party from his last employer. He held the party at his in-laws house and
hired a band to entertain. During the party, he went outside with the band members and
shared in a joint they were passing around. Applicant had been interviewed and hired by
his present employer at the time of his last reported use of marijuana and was aware he
would have to apply for a public trust position. 
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a friend with whom he
previously smoked marijuana. That friend has known Applicant since they attended college
together. He attests that Applicant is a trustworthy individual as best exemplified by the fact
that the friend had selected Applicant and his wife to serve as guardians of his two children
if necessary. Applicant also submitted a copy of a letter he sent to his employer renouncing
the future illegal use of controlled substances and acknowledging that future use would be
grounds for revocation of his trustworthiness entitlement and termination of his
employment. His employer acknowledged receipt of the letter. 
  
POLICIES
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.  2
The standard to be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the
person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.3
Trustworthiness adjudications apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security
Service and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor4
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any
final unfavorable access determination is made.5
An administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
in the Adjudicative Guidelines when evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust
position. The administrative judge must also consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.”  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration,
and any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive information
  Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865. 6
  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.7
  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.8
4
will be resolved in favor of national security. Decisions are made in terms of the national
interest and are not determinations as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.6
The Government is required to present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR.  The Applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other7
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
department counsel.  The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining8
a favorable trustworthiness decision. 
Analysis
Guideline H, Drugs
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
Applicant illegally used and purchased marijuana on a regular basis between 1993
and 1997 while he attended college. He continued to use marijuana on a less frequent
basis after college until his last reported use in November 2007. Between November 2006
and November 2007, Applicant used marijuana four times. Disqualifying Conditions (DC)
25(a): any drug abuse; and DC 25(c): illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase . .
. apply.
Applicant’s last use of marijuana occurred about 18 months ago. However, that use
occurred after he had been hired for a position of trustworthiness and while he was aware
he would have to apply for a trustworthiness determination. His use of marijuana after
college included using the illegal drug with co-workers while he was employed in a
supervisory position. His last use of marijuana occurred with members of a band he had
hired to play at his going away party from work as he was about to commence work in a
trustworthiness position. In the preceding year, he used marijuana on four occasions
despite being married, the father of three young children, and employed in a long-term and
very responsible job. Applicant’s admitted repeated abuse of marijuana between 2006 and
2007 under these circumstances was a gross display of lack of judgment. Accordingly, I
find Mitigating Conditions (MC) 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago . . . or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and MC 26(b): a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs
were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; . . . do not apply. 
5
Applicant submitted a letter to his employer renouncing the future illegal use of any
controlled substance and acknowledging that such use would be grounds for revocation
of his trustworthiness eligibility and termination of his employment. Accordingly, he is
entitled to application of MC 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future, such as: (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation. However, considering the circumstances described above about his
continuing use of marijuana after college, I find application of this mitigating condition
insufficient to mitigate the security concern caused by Applicant’s long-term use of
marijuana through November 2007.
 The objective of a trustworthiness determination is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to sensitive information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
her acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has failed to mitigate
the drug involvement security concern. He has not overcome the case against him nor
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. Guideline H is decided against
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion  
             
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position.
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

