KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel a Judge to render a
favorable decision.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had failed to mitigate the Guideline F
security concerns in her case is sustainable.  Adverse decisions affirmed.  
CASENO: 08-03273.a1
DATE: 05/05/2009
DATE: May 5, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03273
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 22, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On December 18, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings are supported
Applicant disagrees with the Judge’s statement that Applicant had discovered she needed additional surgery1
in early 2008, whereas she states that she found she needed it in 2000 and for a reason different from that cited by the
Judge.  Even if Applicant had explained this earlier, it would not have changed the result here.  
by relevant evidence; and whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Specifically, Applicant points out factual errors in the Judge’s decision.  Applicant also argues that
the Judge should have found her financial situation to be mitigated.   
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  The SOR alleges 10 debts totaling
$16,984.  Prior to the hearing, Applicant admitted to three of the debts.  She denied the others
because she said she did not recognize the names of the creditors after the debts were sold to
collection agencies.  At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged the other debts.  
Applicant’s financial difficulties began after a serious car accident in December 1997, which
caused her to lose her job.  After an orthopedic surgeon inserted metal plates and screws in her limbs,
he advised her to file for disability because arthritis would eventually prevent her from working.
Applicant tried to find a job that would allow her to work in a seated position.  She found such a job
in early 2000, but lost it when the company was sold in February 2002.  Applicant began receiving
Social Security Disability benefits in March 2003.  While Applicant was unemployed, she lived with
different relatives for periods of time.  Applicant found an apartment in 2003, although her income
is not enough to pay her rent and her living expenses.   At times, Applicant  has received assistance
from her sons and her sister to help her pay her expenses.  
Sometime in or after September 2007, Applicant began working part-time at a job which
could accommodate her medical situation.  She had to stop working in May 2008 when her interim
security clearance was rescinded.  Applicant’s supervisor and the head of human resources at that
job testified on her behalf.  
In her appeal, Applicant identifies statements in the Judge’s decision which she considers to
be erroneous.  In explaining why some of the statements are incorrect, Applicant presents
information which was not presented previously.  The Board cannot consider new evidence on
appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s
material findings of security concern are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable
characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Applicant has not identified any
harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.   Considering the record evidence as a whole,1
the Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05434
at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2009).
In her appeal, Applicant also argues that the Judge did not give adequate weight to her
mitigating evidence.  The Judge referred to Applicant’s testimony and discussed the possible
application of mitigating conditions in Applicant’s case.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (May 23, 2008).  The record
supports the Judge’s conclusions regarding Applicant’s financial situation.
Applicant states that the hearing upset her and made her feel like a criminal.  While Applicant
presented an explanation for her current financial difficulties, the Judge found that explanation
insufficient to support a security clearance at this time.  The Judge’s decision is not a reflection on
Applicant’s character.  
After reviewing the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).   “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision  is sustainable.  
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Application a security clearance is AFFIRMED.           
  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple          
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
