 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No.  08-06483 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On February 28, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 10, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On January 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 5, 2009, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing ten Items, 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on February 10, 2009. Applicant received the 
FORM on February 17, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant did not submit any additional information. On 
April 30, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me.  
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.j.  
  
 Applicant is 35 years old and divorced since August 2005. He has three children, 
who live with his former wife. He pays child support through the court.  From 1993 until 
February 2008, he worked for several different companies when he obtained a job, as a 
warehouseman with a defense contractor. Over the course of those years, he was 
unemployed from September 2005 to May 2006 and from September 2007 to February 
2008. (Item 4) 
 
 In July 2005, Applicant filed a petition for a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In November 
2005, the court entered an order discharging approximately $106,000 in liabilities, which 
included a $49,000 mortgage, $21,000 on two automobile loans, and $36,000 in 
medical bills and credit card debts. His petition noted that his year-to-date income for 
2005 was $14,300, for 2004 it was $28,600, and for 2003 it was $27,000. (Item 9)  
 
  In August 2008, Applicant completed a set of Interrogatories related to his 
finances and several delinquent debts. He noted that he was unaware of some of the 
delinquent debts, but that he would investigate the matters. (Item 6) According to the 
budget he submitted, his yearly salary is around $24,000. His net monthly income is 
$1,400 and expenses are $1,095, leaving about $300 as a remainder at the end of the 
month. (Item 6) In his Answer, he stated he was pursuing a second job to help pay his 
debts. 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated March 2008, September 2008 and 
November 2008, the SOR alleged eight delinquent debts, totaling $28,697. The status 
of the debts is as follows: 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a for $610 is a medical bill. Applicant claimed he is making 
payments on the bill, but did not provide any documentation. (Item 6) It 
remains unpaid or unresolved.  
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b for $172 is a medical bill. Applicant stated he is making monthly 
payments on this bill, but did not submit proof of those payments. It remains 
unpaid or unresolved. 
 
 
3 
 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c for $6,777 appears to be a loan or credit card debt. It was sold to 
the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. It is listed as a debt of $8,110 in a credit 
report, as well as in the Interrogatories Applicant answered. (Item 5 at  39, 40; 
Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2; Item 6) It was not included in the Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, as Applicant asserted. (Items 6 and  9) It remains unpaid or 
unresolved. 
 
4.  SOR ¶ 1.d. for $441 is a debt owed to a cable company. Applicant disputed 
the debt. (Item 7) 
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e for $8,110. (See SOR ¶ 1.c) It is listed as $6,777 on the 
September and November 2008 CBRs. (Item 7 and 8) 
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f for $562 was owed to an apartment complex. It was discharged in 
the 2005 bankruptcy. (Item 8 at 2) 
 
7. SOR ¶ 1.g for $326 is a debt owed to a telephone company. Applicant 
claimed he contacted the creditor, who told him the account was closed. It 
does not appear on the September or November 2008 CBR. It is resolved.   
 
8. SOR ¶ 1.h for $11,699 is owed on an automobile. It is listed on the March 
2008 CBR, which indicates that it was transferred or sold to another 
company. (Item 5 at 39). It does not appear on the September or November 
2008 CBRs, nor is any similar amount listed. (Items 7 and 8) Applicant did not 
address this debt in either the Interrogatories or Answer.  It remains 
unresolved. 
 
 In summary, Applicant owes about $19,250 in delinquent debt, rather than the 
$28,697 alleged in the SOR, of which $11,699 is owed on an account that was opened 
in January 2006, after the bankruptcy discharge order was entered in November 2005. 
(Item 5 at 39) Applicant did not provide any documentation that he has addressed any 
of the debts. 
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
 
4 
 
 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19, two of them are potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on three CBRs and his admissions, Applicant has been unable or 
unwilling to satisfy debts that began accruing prior to filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2005 and subsequent to a discharge of approximately $106,000 in November 2005. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. The guideline 
includes six examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.   
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies are not isolated and began prior to 2005, 
when he filed bankruptcy and continued after the completion of the bankruptcy. Hence, 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 2 (a) cannot apply. Some of Applicant’s financial difficulties may be the result of 
low paying positions and two extended periods of unemployment, during and after he 
filed for bankruptcy. However, there is no evidence in the record indicating that he 
responsibly managed his finances after November 2005 and subsequent to that time, 
which is necessary for full application of this mitigating condition. Thus, AG & 20(b) has 
limited application. Applicant did not present any evidence that he received credit 
counseling or that the outstanding delinquent debts are resolved or under control, as 
required under AG & 20(c). Applicant claimed he is paying two medical debts but did not 
submit any evidence of those payments; AG & 20(d) is not applicable. There is 
evidence indicating that he disputed one of the debts; AG & 20(e) is applicable. The 
record does not support the application of AG & 20(f).  
  
 Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 35-years old and has 
worked for a defense contractor since February 2008. Prior to that, he experienced two 
periods of unemployment, which could account for his financial difficulties since the 
November 2005 discharge of debt in bankruptcy.  
 
In August 2008, Applicant learned of the Government’s concerns about his 
finances and indicated that he would begin resolving them. In December 2008, he again 
received notice of those concerns through the SOR, but did not take steps or submit 
any information indicating that he was attempting to resolve the debts or further explain 
his situation. Without such proof, there is insufficient information in the record to mitigate 
the financial concerns. His failure to address the issues over the past year raises 
questions about his judgment.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1c:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.g:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                              
   
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
