 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07059
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Carolyn H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On January 3, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required in connection
with his research work for a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant two sets of interrogatories  to obtain clarification of1
and/or additional information about potentially disqualifying information in his
background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation, including his
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant2
access to classified information. On November 14, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in
the revised Adjudicative Guidelines  under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline3
C (foreign preference).
On December 1, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR, admitted without
explanation all of the SOR allegations, and requested a hearing. On January 14, 2009,
Department Counsel made a pre-hearing submission through which the government
asked that administrative notice be taken of certain facts germane to the issues
presented by the pleadings. The submission consisted of a five page memorandum to
which 15 documents (I - XV) were attached.
The case was assigned to me on February 23, 2009, and I convened a hearing
on March 31, 2009. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on April 10, 2009. The
parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented three exhibits – Applicant’s
e-QIP (Gx. 1) and his responses to interrogatories (Gx. 2 and 3). They were admitted
without objection. I also granted the government’s pre-hearing administrative notice
request. The entire administrative notice request is included in the record as Judicial
Exhibit (Jx. 1); however, for reasons discussed at the hearing (Tr. 24 - 27), I have not
considered the information contained in Jx. 1, Attachments XII - XIV.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline C, the government alleged that Applicant exercises dual
citizenship between the U.S. and Israel (SOR ¶ 1.a); that, as of August 2008, he
possessed an active Israeli passport (SOR ¶ 1.b); that, despite the fact he is a native-
born U.S. citizen, in 2005, he renewed his Israeli passport for 10 years (SOR ¶ 1.c); that
he used his Israeli passport instead of his U.S. passport for travel to Israel (SOR ¶ 1.d);
that he used his Israeli passport instead of his U.S. passport for travel to India in 2008
(SOR ¶ 1.e); that he voted in elections in Israel three times (SOR ¶ 1.f); that he served
in the Israeli army in 1984 and 1985 as required of all Israeli citizens (SOR ¶ 1.g); and,
as also alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h, that he and his wife have owned a condominium in Israel
since 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.h).
Under Guideline B, the government alleged that Applicant’s mother-in-law is a
citizen of and resides in Israel (SOR ¶ 2.a); that Applicant traveled to Israel at least four
times between 2000 and 2008 (SOR ¶ 2.b); that his travel to Israel from 2000 to 2007
was for scientific collaborations and to give lectures (SOR ¶ 2.c); that he was a
professor at an Israeli institute from 1989 until 1991 (SOR ¶ 2.d); that he was an
associate professor at an Israeli university in 1984 and 1985 (SOR ¶ 2.e); that he was a
3
lecturer at an Israeli institute from 1980 to 1982 (SOR ¶ 2.f) and from 1976 to 1978
(SOR ¶ 2.g); and that he and his wife jointly own a condominium in Israel (SOR ¶ 2.h).
As noted above, Applicant admitted without explanation each of these allegations. I
have also made the following findings of relevant fact
Applicant is 58 years old and is a tenured professor of electrical and computer
engineering at a major U.S. university. In 1976, he received his doctorate in
mathematics from a prestigious U.S. university and has taught in universities in the U.S.
since 1986. (Gx. 1) Applicant also has an extensive record of research consulting work
for companies working on defense-related projects. His request for a security clearance
is for his mathematical analysis and research work for a company sub-contracted to a
large defense contractor. (Tr. 29 - 33)
Applicant was born and raised in the United States. His mother, was born and
raised in Palestine before the 1948 creation of the state of Israel. She and Applicant’s
father came to the United States in about 1950. In about 1972, they divorced and she
returned to Israel, where she lived until she died. Applicant’s father is also deceased.
Applicant moved to Israel after finishing his graduate education in 1976. By virtue of his
mother’s Israeli citizenship, Applicant is also an Israeli citizen. He first received an
Israeli passport for travel with his parents when he was about six years old. As an adult,
he has held and maintained an Israeli passport for at least 30 years. His current Israeli
passport is valid until 2015. Applicant has traveled often to Israel, most recently in
March 2009. He traveled there at least five times in 2008. All of Applicant’s travel to
Israel and to other countries has been pursuant to his work as an academician and
lecturer in mathematics and engineering, and has been paid for by the universities for
whom he has worked. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 57)
By Israeli law, Applicant must use an Israeli passport to enter and leave that
country. (Jx. 1, Attachment II) For all other travel, and to leave and enter the United
States, he uses his U.S. passport.  On one occasion, when traveling from Israel to India
for a personal matter, he needed a visa from the Indian consulate in Tel Aviv. He
presented his U.S. passport, but Indian consular officials asked for his Israeli passport,
in which they stamped their visa. (Gx. 2; Tr. 37) Applicant intends to retain his passport,
both for reasons of emotional ties to Israel and to comply with Israeli law when entering
or leaving that country. He is likewise unwilling to renounce his Israeli citizenship. (Gx.
2; Tr. 43)
Applicant and his wife were married in Israel in June 1977. They raised two
children, now ages 32 and 27. Their children were born in Israel, but raised and
educated in the United States. Their children have lived in Israel as post-graduate
students, hold Israeli citizenship and Israeli passports, and, in the case of Applicant’s
son, served in the Israeli army as required of all Israeli citizens. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr.
59 - 61)
Applicant’s wife was born in Romania, but raised in Israel. She became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2007. Her 88-year-old mother, a retired chemist,
still lives in Jerusalem. Applicant has incidental telephone contact with her every week,
and his wife speaks to her daily. His wife travels to Israel three times each year to visit,
4
and his mother-in-law visits them in the U.S. for several weeks each year. She is
applying for permanent resident alien status in the U.S.. Applicant has no contact with
his wife’s extended family overseas. Applicant also has extended family on his mother’s
side still in Israel, but he has no contact with any of them. Aside from compulsory
military service, none of Applicant’s own family or his wife’s family has ever been
employed by or is an official of the Israeli government. (Tr. 50 - 55)
Applicant voted in Israeli elections in 1992, 1999 and 2004. He did not travel to
Israel so he could vote, but voted because he happened to be in Israel on those
occasions. Applicant intends to vote in future Israeli elections if the opportunity again
presents itself. (Tr. 43 - 45, 58) 
In August 1984, Applicant returned to Israel with his wife and children, in part,
because her father had suffered a heart attack. Applicant also took a teaching position
at an Israeli university. However, when he entered the country, officials noted he had
not fulfilled the military service required of all Israeli citizens. In October 1984, he was
drafted into the army and served until being released from military service in February
1985. He then apparently resumed his teaching until August 1985. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 45
- 49)
In addition to his academic positions in the U.S., Applicant has taught and
lectured for extended periods at universities and scientific institutes in Israel. From
August 1976 through July 1978, and again from September 1980 until August 1982,
Applicant was first a lecturer, then a senior lecturer in mathematics at a science
research institute near Tel Aviv. From August 1984 until August 1985, as discussed
above, he was an associate professor of mathematics at an Israeli university. In
October 1989, he took a two-year leave of absence from his professorship in electrical
and computer engineering at a large state university in the U.S. to teach electrical
engineering at a technological institute in Israel. (Gx. 1)
Applicant and his wife jointly own a condominium in Jerusalem. She bought it in
2000 for her mother to use; however, Applicant believes one of her cousins is using it
now. Applicant has never seen the property and believes the purchase price was about
the equivalent of $200,000. All of the financing for the property was done in the United
States through U.S. banks. All payments and related matters are handled solely in the
U.S.. Applicant has no financial interests in Israel save for the vestiges of payroll and
retirement accounts from his employment at the universities and institutions discussed
above. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 34 - 35, 48 - 50)
Israel has an advanced, industrial market economy, and its government is
characterized as a multi-party parliamentary democracy. (Jx. 1, Attachment III) Since its
founding in 1948, Israel and the United States have had close political, economic, and
military ties based, in large measure, on common democratic values and mutual
security interests in the Middle East. Israel has an independent judiciary and the
government’s human rights record is generally free of reports of widespread abuse by
government officials. What human rights concerns there are stem predominantly from
reports of discrimination and arbitrary detention in the course of Israeli counter-terrorism
efforts. Israel is also one of the most active countries engaged in military and industrial
 Directive. 6.3.4
5
espionage. Their efforts have been directed at hostile and friendly countries alike,
including the United States. Overall, however, their interests are generally aligned with
ours, especially where matters of regional security are concerned.  (Jx. 1, Attachments I
- III, VI, VII)
Applicant was, at all times during the investigation and adjudication process,
candid and forthcoming about his ties to Israel and about all information relevant to his
application for a security clearance. He avers that he is a loyal U.S. citizen who does
not place the interests of Israel or any other country ahead of the United States. His
parents immigrated to the United States with little in their possession and made a good
life for their family. Applicant grew up in modest circumstances and is grateful for the
opportunities he has been given, especially his education. (Tr. 39) While his career has
generally been in the world of university academics, Applicant also has been directly
involved in a number of defense industry research and development efforts, albeit on an
unclassified basis. (Tr. 63 - 67) He insists he would not do anything to undermine the
U.S. national interests because he is a loyal, trustworthy American and because he
understands that Israel’s existence and national security are dependent on the United
States. (Tr. 37 - 40)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 6, Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and AG ¶ 9, Guideline C (Foreign Preference).
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
 AG ¶ 11(a) provides for m itigation where an applicant’s “dual citizenship is based solely on parents'8
citizenship or birth in a foreign country.”
6
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Foreign Preference.
The government presented sufficient information to support the facts alleged in
SOR ¶ 1. Those allegations, which Applicant admits, raise security concerns about
whether Applicant may place the interests of another country ahead of those of the
United States. Specifically, the security concern stated in AG ¶ 9 (Guideline C: Foreign
Preference) is that, “[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
The facts established show that Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen, who also has
Israeli citizenship through his mother. By itself, such status is not disqualifying.8
However, since 1976 Applicant has actively exercised his Israeli citizenship through his
possession and use of an active Israeli passport, at times instead of his U.S. passport.
Applicant also served in the Israeli military and voted in three Israeli elections. These
facts require application of the disqualifying conditions listed under AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise
of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or
through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1)
possession of a current foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear
arms for a foreign country; and... (7) voting in a foreign election).
 W hile the government does not require renunciation of one’s foreign citizenship, an expressed willingness9
to do so would inure to his benefit through application of AG ¶ 11(b). 
7
The government’s information also established that Applicant and his wife jointly
own real estate in Israel possibly valued at about $200,000. This fact may be a financial
interest in Israel; however, for that fact to be disqualifying under Guideline C, it must
also be shown that Applicant is using his foreign citizenship to protect that interest. (AG
¶ 10(a)(5)) Such is not the case here.
By contrast, the record does not support any of the mitigating factors under AG ¶
11. Applicant derived his Israeli citizenship from his mother. However, he has actively
exercised his foreign citizenship since at least 1976. Further, he has not expressed a
willingness to renounce his foreign citizenship.  Because he was born a U.S. citizen, AG9
¶ 11(c) (exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor) is not
applicable. His possession and use of an active foreign passport, which Applicant will
not surrender and which he intends to renew in 2015, has not been sanctioned by any
cognizant security authority. Finally, there is no information that shows that the U.S.
government encouraged Applicant to vote in Israeli elections on three occasions when
he happened to be in the country on election day.
In response to the government’s information, Applicant avers he has no
preference for Israeli interests over the U.S. As to his use of an Israeli passport, he is
unwilling to relinquish it because he is required to use it when he travels to Israel. His
position is, in part, that Israeli law left him no choice in the matter of his passport or his
military service. As to the latter, Applicant had lived in Israel for several years beginning
in 1976, and it is reasonable to assume he knew or should have known what Israeli law
required in this regard. Accordingly, I conclude he knowingly made himself available to
this and all other requirements of Israeli law. 
Applicant also acknowledged that he maintains his passport and, by inference,
his Israeli citizenship for emotional reasons, as well. All of the information bearing on
this issue shows that Applicant has willingly subjected himself to Israeli laws and other
requirements of Israeli citizenship. Despite his sincere expressions of preference for
U.S. interests, Applicant’s actions in furtherance of his Israeli citizenship raise legitimate
security concerns expressed through Guideline C about his ability to protect U.S.
interests in preference to all others. The information Applicant presented in response to
the government’s case was not sufficient to mitigate these concerns.
Foreign Influence. 
The government also presented sufficient information to support the factual
allegations in SOR ¶ 2. Those allegations, which Applicant admits, raise security
concerns about Applicant’s personal relationships and other interests in Israel.
Specifically, as stated in AG ¶ 6, 
8
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
At the outset, the government’s information about Applicant’s joint ownership of a
condominium in Israel is not disqualifying. Apart from his admission that he has an
interest in the property, it appears it is used by either his mother-in-law or a relative with
whom he has no contact. The purchase financing was conducted in the U.S., and the
government has presented nothing to show how, if at all, it constitutes “a substantial
business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or
foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of
foreign influence or exploitation.” (AG ¶ 7(e); emphasis added) 
As to his other foreign interests, although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s
wife, children, and mother-in-law are all Israeli citizens. His wife was only recently
naturalized as a U.S. citizen, and their children are native-born Israeli citizens who
derive U.S. citizenship from Applicant. His elderly mother-in-law resides in Israel full
time, and his wife and children reside in the U.S.. However, like Applicant, they spend
considerable time in Israel each year for professional and personal reasons. His wife
has weekly, if not daily contact with her mother, who visits the U.S. for several weeks
each year. Applicant’s wife travels to Israel for extended visits annually as well. These
facts require consideration of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion). 
There is no question that Applicant has close ties to foreign citizens through his
family. However, for AG ¶ 7(a) to apply, it must be determined whether their presence in
Israel “creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion.” Israel is an open democratic society with a good human rights
record and close ties to the U.S. based on generally similar political, military and cultural
interests. However, in pursuit of its own interests, Israel is also known to aggressively
engage in industrial and economic espionage targeted against, inter alia, the U.S. Thus,
it must be acknowledged, especially in light of Applicant’s previous work with U.S.
defense projects, that such a heightened risk exists.  AG ¶ 7(a) applies.
As to potential application of the Guideline B mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 8,
despite Applicant’s assertions to the contrary, his relationship with his mother-in-law is
presumed to be close by virtue of his close relationship with his wife. Further, although
not specifically alleged in the SOR, the fact that his wife and children, to whom he is
even more closely bound, also are Israeli citizens and spend significant time in Israel
9
precludes application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign  individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.). For
the same reasons, AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation) does not apply.
Application of AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest) is likewise precluded because Applicant clearly has
emotional ties to Israel and has divided his interests between Israel and the U.S.
throughout most of his adult life. 
Executive Order 10865, Section 7, specifically excludes the use of a
determination about an applicant’s loyalty (or disloyalty) to the U.S. as a basis for
determining one’s suitability for access to classified information. However, the language
of AG ¶ 8(b) specifically requires a comparison of an applicant’s “sense of loyalty or
obligation” to foreign interests with his “relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Here, the
Applicant was sincere when he expressed his loyalty and commitment to the United
States as a native-born citizen, who is grateful for the opportunities he has received,
and claimed that he would do nothing to undermine the national interest in the event of
a potential conflict. As a native born U.S. citizen whose livelihood and assets are in the
U.S., Applicant has longstanding loyalties and relationships here. However, his
statements about his loyalty to the U.S. are also probative of the applicability of AG ¶
8(b), because they are couched in his awareness that protection of U.S. interests is,
among other things, necessary for the continued viability Israel. Thus, it is still unclear
whether Applicant can be expected to resolve in favor of the U.S. any conflict of
interests arising from his foreign ties and relationships.
The mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 8(d)(the foreign contacts and activities are on
U.S. Government business or are approved by the cognizant security authority) and
8(e) (the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements regarding
the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations
from a foreign country) are inapposite to the facts of this case. The applicability of AG ¶
8(f) (the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is
such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to
influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual) is rendered moot by the lack of
information that would establish Applicant’s property interest in Israel bears any security
significance under this guideline.
In summary, however, I conclude that Applicant’s personal and professional
contacts in Israel raise reasonable security concerns. The government’s information
also showed that Applicant travels to Israel several times each year for professional
purposes, and that from 1976 until 1991, he lived and worked in Israel off and on for
 See footnote 4, supra.10
 See footnote 7, supra. 11
10
seven years. As allegations of fact, his travel and work in Israel are not, under this
guideline, disqualifying in and of themselves. They merely plead evidence of facts
relevant and material to an informed decision about Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information. Accordingly, I conclude, having considered all of the available
information bearing on the issue of possible foreign preference, that Applicant has failed
to mitigate this security concern.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B and C. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a mature,
responsible, and highly accomplished 58-year-old academician who has an extensive
history of valuable consulting work with defense contractors. Further, he has been a
model of stability, as he and his wife, who holds a doctorate in chemical engineering,
have been married for more than 30 years and have raised two children, who are
professionally and academically accomplished in their own right. For much of his adult
life his personal interests have been divided between Israel and the U.S. Certainly,
there has been no misconduct here and there is nothing inappropriate or illegal about
Applicant’s dual citizenship status and his interests overseas. However, in the context of
deciding whether to allow him access to classified information, the totality of Applicant’s
circumstances place on him the heavy burden of demonstrating that he would not be
vulnerable to coercion by a foreign government or that he would be compromised by
conflicting interests. Insofar as it is unlikely that Applicant’s circumstances will change in
the foreseeable future, a fair and commonsense assessment  of all available10
information shows Applicant has not overcome the doubts about his suitability under
these circumstances. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h: For Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
