                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-11522
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
May 27, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 4, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On January 29, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 23, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The case was originally assigned to another
Administrative Judge on March 19, 2009.  The case was reassigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on April 6, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 7, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for April 28, 2009.  The Government offered five exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection.
Applicant called three witnesses and offered four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s
Exhibits A through D.  He also testified on her own behalf.  The record remained open
until close of business on May 19, 2009 to allow the Applicant to submit additional
documentation.  Applicant submitted four Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as
2
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 4 that were admitted into evidence without
objection. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on May 6, 2009.  Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 44 years old and has a high school diploma.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as a Flight Test Mechanic and Inspector and is seeking to obtain a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant joined the military in September 1982, and went in under the
delayed entry program in September 1983.  Prior to September 1999, the Applicant and
his wife were gainfully employed, although living beyond their means, they were able to
pay their bills on time.  In September 1999, the Applicant received military orders to
move out of state.  His wife was force to quit her job.  Once relocated, their income
never reached what it had been and they had difficulties paying their bills.  They
decided that the only way out was to file Bankruptcy.  In September 1999, the Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy.  Their debts were discharged in bankruptcy in January
2000.  
After retiring from the military in March 2004, the Applicant and his wife got their
real estate licenses and went into real estate sales.  They were doing very well
financially for a short time until suddenly, the market dried up.  The Applicant went
about eighteen months without a paycheck and fell behind on the financial obligations
set forth below.
The Applicant’s testified that when the Government sent him a copy of his credit
report, he learned for the first time that he owed a credit card debt in the amount of
$1,412.00.  (Tr. p. 28 and Government Exhibits 2, 3 and 4).  The Applicant settled this
debt on March 11, 2009.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).   
He also learned of a debt he owed to a creditor in the amount of $65,000.00 that
had been charged off.  This was for a second mortgage on his home that he took out in
January 2006, when the real estate market was tough.  He used the money to live on.
Recently, with good intentions, he set up a temporary arrangement with the creditor to
pay $200.00 a month toward the loan.  The arrangement automatically sent the debt
3
into collection.  Applicant has continued to make the payments on time since the
arrangement.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B).  Applicant indicates that the creditor has agreed
to settle the debt for $15,000.00 and the payment must be made by May 30, 2009.
Applicant plans to settle the debt.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 2).
He also learned of a debt he owed in the amount of $100.00.  He stated that he
originally paid the debt, but the check bounced and was returned.  He has since paid
the debt in full.  (Tr. p. 57 and Applicant’s Exhibit C).      
While in the real estate business, the Applicant did not pay quarterly taxes on his
income.  As a result, he owes the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for back taxes, fees,
penalties and interest approximately $47,000.00.  In November 2008, a lien was placed
against the Applicant in the approximate amount of $47,642.00.  He hired a financial
counseling firm for $4,500.00 to assist him in negotiating with the IRS.  They did nothing
but take his money and request more.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).  Applicant then decided
to handle his financial matters himself.  He recently contacted the IRS and has since
paid off his back taxes owed for tax years 2005 and 2007.  He currently owes
approximately $49,024.10 for tax year 2006.  He has entered into an agreement with
the IRS to pay $600.00 monthly until the 2006 taxes are paid.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibits 3 and 4).         
Applicant testified that he has now learned to live within his means and operates
under a budget.  (Tr. p. 39).  He earns in excess of $100,000.00 a year, and his wife
earns about $60,000.00.  He receives approximately $1,547.00 monthly in retirement
pay.  He has two checking accounts, one that contains $7,500.00, the that has
$2,300.00.  One of his savings accounts has $100.00 in it, the other contains
$16,027.00.  He has no credit cards, no other delinquent accounts, and is current with
all of his regular monthly expenses.
Applicant’s witnesses include his second shift manager, a past military associate
and a good friend each testified that the Applicant is reliable, trustworthy, honest and
responsible.  He is considered a man of high integrity.  His supervisor indicates that
among the seventeen Flight Mechanics he supervises, the Applicant rates among the
top three.  (Tr. pp. 27-33, 78-81 and 93-95).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
4
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation; 
19.(e) consistent spending beyond ones means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio,
and/or other financial analysis. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct 
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
5
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
6
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.  After retiring from the military, and during the height of his real
estate career, the Applicant was extremely careless and irresponsible.  He made a lot of
money in a short time, lived extravagantly, and did not pay his taxes.  Since the
downturn in the real estate market, and his decision to re-enter the defense industry, he
has been reminded of the importance of maintaining good credit and fiscal
responsibility.  He has contacted each of his delinquent creditors and has either paid off
the debt or is making payments to them in a systematic fashion to resolve the debt.  He
understands that in regard to each of his outstanding creditors, he must immediately
arrive at a permanent payment plan that is acceptable to the creditor and he must
continue to make payments accordingly, until the debt is paid in full.  Under the
circumstances, he has made a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness, and there is
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has demonstrated that he can
properly handle his financial affairs.  In the event that he fails to follow through with his
payment plans to his creditors and resolve his debt, his security clearance will be in
immediate jeopardy.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability  or  unwillingness to satisfy debts; 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation; and 19.(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated
by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio,
and/or other financial analysis apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; 20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control and 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating
that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented and it sufficiently mitigates the
adverse information brought against him.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant
has overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
7
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
   
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
