                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10605 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Spouse of Applicant 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On February 6 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 4, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 15, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 4, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(AE) A and B. The record was held open until May 18, 2009, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. A post-hearing request was made by Applicant to extend 
the time to submit additional documents to May 20, 2009. Department Counsel did not 
object (Hearing Exhibit I) and the record remained opened until the requested date. 
Applicant submitted additional documents that were marked as AE C through E. 
Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 11, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since March 
2008. He retired from the Air Force in 2005, in the grade of E-6, after 20 years of 
service. He has been married since 1996 and has one child from the marriage and three 
children from a previous marriage. Three of the children currently live at home. 
Applicant was unemployed from January 2008 to March 2008, until he was hired by his 
present employer.1 
 
Upon retiring from the military Applicant’s income decreased significantly. He had 
difficulty getting a job that paid enough to compensate his prior military income. He 
expected that he would be earning more than what he was. Applicant was earning 
approximately $62,000 a year while in the military. When he retired he earned an hourly 
wage of $13.25 or approximately $25,000 annually. His retirement pay was 
approximately $27,000 annually. Applicant worked extra hours to earn more and meet 
his expenses, but still could not pay his bills. At some point his monthly mortgage 
payment increased due to his failure to make the payments on time. He began falling 
behind in his financial obligations. He got behind in his mortgage payments. He 
attempted to catch up with the payments and paid a lump sum to do so, but the 
mortgage company then requested another large lump sum, which again was paid. 
Applicant was trying to prevent his home from foreclosure. The two large lump sum 
payments caused a shortage of money to pay his other bills. He refinanced his home to 
obtain a lower interest rate on the mortgage. He took out a second mortgage and 
borrowed against the equity of his home. Applicant kept slipping back into being unable 
to make his mortgage payments. Both he and his wife were working at the time. 
Applicant’s wife has since been unemployed since October 2008, due to a medical 
condition. Due to his concern about losing his house Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
under Chapter 13 to prevent foreclosure in February 2009.2 
 
Applicant’s payment plan under his bankruptcy requires he pay $632.41 a month 
for five years. At the time of his hearing he had made three payments on the plan. 
1 Tr. 27-32, 84. 
 
2 Tr. 26-70. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Included in the plan are the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b (home mortgage), 1.c (medical, 
$84), 1.d (medical, $196), 1.e (medical, $333), 1.f (medical $147), 1.g (medical, $75), 
1.h (phone, $376) and 1.i (recreational vehicle, $2,678).3 Applicant testified he was 
unaware of the medical debts and the phone bill until he received the SOR. He did not 
get a bill from the creditors at the time or from a collection agency for these debts. He 
believed his insurance covered the medical bills. He had shut off his land line phone two 
years ago and believes this bill was for that service. All of Applicant’s debts in the SOR 
are being paid through his bankruptcy plan.4  
 
 Applicant participated in the on-line financial counseling required when filing for 
bankruptcy. He anticipates having extra expendable income when the lease on a car he 
has expires and he returns the car. His son is graduating from high school this year and 
entering the military and will no longer be living at home. Applicant does not have any 
credit cards and has no other delinquent debts. He and his wife started a budget several 
months ago and are saving $325 a month and have $500 left after paying their 
expenses. He anticipates a refund of approximately $1,100 from his 2008 tax returns. 
Applicant earns more at his current job and is able to meet his financial obligations. He 
is committed to repaying his debts and living within his means.5  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor provided a character letter for him. He believes Applicant 
to be an extremely hard worker, who values the principles of ethical decisions. Applicant 
is extremely dedicated to his country and family. He is considered responsible, 
dedicated and a caring individual. A fellow worker considers Applicant conscientious 
and courteous. He is a person who pursues his work responsibilities with diligence and 
care.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
3 Tr. 92-96; GE 3 and 4; AE D and E. SOR ¶ 1.i is for a recreational vehicle that was purchased in 
June 2004, prior to Applicant’s retirement from the military. The vehicle was voluntarily repossessed in 
April 2008, after Applicant retired and had financial difficulties. The amount listed is the deficiency after 
the vehicle was sold.  
 
4 Tr. 57-60, 70-79, 96-99. 
 
5 Tr. 79-92. 
 
6 AE A and B. 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay for a period time. He 
continues to owe the debts and is paying them through a bankruptcy plan. I find both 
disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because his delinquent debts are not completely 
satisfied and are still being paid through his bankruptcy plan. However, the 
circumstances that caused Applicant’s difficulty in paying his bills are unlikely to recur. 
Applicant experienced a significant decrease in his income when he retired from the 
military. He had difficulty finding a job that compensated for the loss of his income, even 
after receiving his retirement pay. He was unemployed for a short period of time. These 
factors contributed to his financial inability to pay all of his bills. Applicant attempted to 
prevent the foreclosure of his home by filing for bankruptcy. All of his debts are included 
in his repayment plan. He now has a job that pays more and has a budget. He has not 
incurred additional delinquent debt. Applicant is committed to living within his means. I 
 
6 
 
 
find the conditions that affected Applicant’s finances were beyond his control. He has 
acted responsibly in putting together a plan to repay his creditors and has made 
consistent payments toward that plan. I find all of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military for 
twenty years. He had difficulty finding a job that paid well enough to supplement his 
retirement income and got behind in paying his bills. To prevent losing his house he 
filed for bankruptcy and is paying his debts through a court approved plan. Applicant is 
committed to resolving all of his debts and living debt free. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant successfully mitigated 
the security concerns arising from Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
      
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
