 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10783 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F, arising from a 
delinquent credit card debt of about $32,000. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on June 11, 2008 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 5). On February 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on February 12, 2009 (GX 3); answered it in an 
undated document; and requested determination on the record without a hearing (GX 
4). Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on March 13, 2009. 
On March 17, 2009, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM 
on March 25, 2009, but he did not respond. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the single allegation in the SOR. 
His admission is incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is an unmarried 36-year-old field test supervisor employed by a federal 
contractor since October 2000. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
November 1994 to October 2000. He received a security clearance at some time in the 
past, but he did not indicate the date he received it on his security clearance application. 
The record does not reflect whether he currently holds a clearance. 
 
 Applicant disclosed a delinquent credit card debt of about $30,000 on his security 
clearance application (GX 5 at 18). His credit bureau report (CBR) dated July 10, 2008, 
reflected a delinquent credit card debt of $32,875 that was charged off as a bad debt 
and referred for collection (GX 7 at 4). His CBR dated December 24, 2008, reflected a 
delinquent credit card debt of about $32,000 (GX 6 at 1). He admitted the debt in his 
answer to the SOR (GX 4). He has submitted nothing to explain, refute, mitigate, or 
extenuate the adverse information on his two CBRs. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 3
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges one delinquent credit card debt of about $32,000, and 
Applicant admitted the debt. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 4
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The potentially disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(a) is raised by Ainability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by Aa history of not meeting financial 
obligations.@ Applicant’s admission and his two CBRs are sufficient to raise both 
disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to him to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). Applicant 
submitted no mitigating evidence, and the record establishes none of the enumerated 
mitigating conditions under this guideline. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. My whole person analysis in 
this case is limited, because the record reflects only the information disclosed by 
Applicant in his security clearance application. He disclosed no information about 
himself or the circumstances of his indebtedness in his answer to the SOR or his 
response to the FORM. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline F and the absence of 
mitigating evidence, and having evaluated all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial 
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 5
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
