1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 07-16653
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Stephen J. Bildman, Personal Representative
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and information technology
security concerns, but failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concern.
Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On June 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
F, financial considerations, M, use of information technology, and E, personal conduct.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the Department of Defense on December 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on August 20, 2011, denying all of the allegations
except 1.a, and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 31,
2
2011. A notice of hearing was issued on November 14, 2011, scheduling the case for
December 1, 2011. I held the hearing as scheduled and received nine Government
exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, and 17 Applicant Exhibits
(AE) marked as AE A through Q. Also, I considered the testimony of Applicant and a
character witness.
At the close of the hearing, I left the record open, at Applicant’s request, for the
submission of an additional exhibit. Within the time allotted, Applicant submitted the
additional exhibit. Department Counsel had no objection, and I admitted it as AE R.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 9, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old married man with four children, The oldest three are
teenagers from an earlier marriage that ended in divorce in 2003. The youngest is
seven years old. Applicant’s ex-wife has physical custody of the two oldest teenagers,
and Applicant has physical custody of the youngest teenager. (Tr. 25) Applicant is a
high school graduate and has taken some college courses.
Applicant works in the information technology field. He has earned several
information technology certifications over the years. Applicant has worked for his current
employer since March 2011. 
From 2003 to approximately 2010, Applicant accrued approximately $22,000 of
delinquent debt. (Tr. 28) Applicant owes the majority, totalling approximately $15,000, to
a car company (subparagraph 1.a). This debt became delinquent in 2007. (GE 5 at 2)
The remainder of the delinquencies include a credit card account (subparagraph 1.b),
utilities (subparagraphs 1.c, 1h), a medical account (subparagraph 1.d), another
automobile delinquency (subparagraph 1.e), two student loan accounts (subparagraphs
1.f and 1.g), and two miscellaneous delinquencies (subparagraphs 1.I, 1.j).
Applicant’s financial problems stem from his 2003 divorce, and were exacerbated
when his current wife lost her job in 2010. (Tr. 48) She remains unemployed. (Tr. 47)
Since beginning his current job, Applicant’s salary has increased by $20,000. (Tr.
33) He has several hundred dollars of after-expense monthly income. (Tr. 48)  This has
enabled him to begin satisfying his delinquencies. As of the hearing date, Applicant had
satisfied all of the debts except subparagraphs 1.a, 1.g, and 1.i. 
Applicant contacted the creditor listed in subparagraph 1.a. It agreed to reduce
the delinquency by half, but insisted on the payment in a lump sum, which Applicant
could not afford. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s supervisor, the chief executive officer of the
company, testified. He was so impressed with Applicant’s work quality that he agreed to
pay the debt and deduct it from a future “bonus or profit share . . .” (Tr. 84) The day
after the hearing, Applicant submitted a copy of the check, drawn from his employer’s
account, satisfying subparagraph 1.a. (AE R)
Applicant and his father share the same name.1
3
Applicant disputes subparagraphs 1.g and 1.i. Subparagraph 1.g is an allegedly
delinquent student loan totalling $3,527. Applicant contends this is his father’s debt.1
Neither the age of the debtor listed on the bill nor the social security number of the
debtor matches Applicant. (Compare AE G and GE 1 at 1) Applicant submitted
evidence showing that his student loan account is current. (AE F) I find that Applicant
has only one student loan account, as listed in subparagraph 1.i, and it is current.  
Subparagraph 1.i is a debt allegedly owed to a book club totalling $70. Applicant
disputes this debt, but has been unsuccessful in contacting the original creditor.
Before Applicant worked for his current employer, he worked, among other
places, for another defense contractor between 1998 and 2003. (GE 1 at 16) His duties
included assisting the Government employees with using their information technology
system, “changing system tapes for backups, balancing daily logs, and running system
scripts.” (Tr. 37)
On January 24, 2003, the Government client of Applicant’s employer alleged that
he created directory files and scripts within a larger directory without obtaining
permission from the Government’s system administrator. Also, Applicant was alleged to
have installed an editor within the system directory without the system administrator’s
prior review. (GE 4 at 3) 
The Government system administrator who reported these problems noted that
Applicant did not act with “malicious intent,” and was actually trying to improve or
minimize the risk of operator error. (GE 4 at 3) However, he “did not think to ask the
appropriate personnel for permission,” nor did he first inquire about the “rules and
regulations that govern creating, editing, and modifying such files. (GE 4 at 3)
Based on theses alleged information technology infractions, the Government
client of Applicant’s employer asked that he be removed from the contract. When
Applicant’s employer confronted him with these allegations, Applicant stated that he
was unaware that he had committed any information technology infractions. Also, he
asserted he had no reason to believe he was violating protocol because one of the
onsite Government employees helped him download the editor. (GE 4 at 3) The system
administrator who reported Applicant’s alleged misconduct acknowledged that a
Government employee helped Applicant, but noted that he was not in her chain of
command.
Applicant’s employer, after reviewing the allegations against him, told him to sign
a resignation in lieu of dismissal, but told him to “hang tight,” and promised to re-hire
him as soon as an employment opportunity on another contract arose. Applicant then
resigned. Nine days later, his employer re-hired him and assigned him to another
contract. (AE E at 3) Applicant continued to work with his employer for another six
4
weeks before leaving to take another position. He had no additional adverse incidents
for the remainder of his stint with his employer.
Applicant completed a security clearance application on October 3, 2006. He
answered “no” in response to “Section 22: Employment Record . . . e. Last 7 years,
fired, quit, or left/unfavorable circumstances?” (GE 1 at 34) Applicant testified that he
did not consider that his employer in 2003 released him under unfavorable
circumstances after asking him to resign, because they rehired him to work on another
contract, as promised, within ten days of his resignation.  
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1997. He did not complete basic training,
as he received a general discharge after testing positive for marijuana. (Tr. 56, 97) In
response to questions about his discharge from an investigative agent in 2006,
Applicant stated it occurred after he experienced a knee problem. (GE 2 at 10) He did
not disclose that he had failed a drug test. (GE 2 at 10)
During cross-examination, Applicant testified that he told the investigative agent
of the failed drug test, and that the investigator’s interview summary inaccurately
excluded it. (Tr. 57) In late 2009, DOHA propounded interrogatories to Applicant. (GE 2)
Attached to the interrogatories was a copy of the investigator’s summary of Applicant’s
personal subject interview. (GE 2 at 10) Question 3 asked whether the summary
accurately reflected the information that Applicant provided to the investigator. Applicant
answered, “Yes.” (GE 2 at 8)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel  . . . ” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s financial struggles trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant did not elaborate about his 2003 divorce and how it contributed to his
financial problems. Moreover, his most significant delinquency, the car loan listed in
subparagraph 1.a, became delinquent four years after the divorce. Nevertheless, since
obtaining his current job with a significantly higher salary, Applicant has contacted his
creditors and satisfied all of the delinquencies except subparagraph 1.a, 1.g, and 1.i.
Although Applicant had not satisfied subparagraph 1.a as of the hearing date, he did
make good-faith efforts to develop a payment plan. When these efforts were
unsuccessful, his boss paid the debt for him, and will develop a repayment plan
whereupon Applicant will repay him through either a reduced future bonus, or reduced
profit-share.
Applicant provided evidence successfully disputing the student loan listed in
subparagraph 1.g. The only unresolved debt is 1.i, a disputed debt less than $100
dollars. I conclude that all of the mitigating conditions apply. 
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.” 
Applicant’s omission from his security clearance application of a job that he
resigned from under adverse circumstances raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a),
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies. Applicant contends that the circumstances of his resignation
from his job in 2003 is not covered under Section 22 of the security clearance
application because his employer was not taking a punitive action when it asked him to
resign in lieu of termination. Rather, they were simply removing him from the contract
and taking him off the payroll until another contract opportunity became available. 
According to the Appeal Board, “however narrowly [an] applicant seeks to
characterize . . . the facts and circumstances, applicant[s] are bound by the plain
language of the question,” when completing a security clearance application. (ISCR
Case No. 98-0470 (App. Bd. Apr. 19, 1999)) Consequently, although the credibility of
Applicant’s contention is bolstered by the fact that the company re-hired him within two
weeks of his resignation, I am unable to conclude the omission was unintentional.
In evaluating Applicant’s credibility, I considered his cross-examination
responses to questions regarding the circumstances surrounding his discharge from the
Navy. Specifically, when asked why he did not tell the investigative agent in 2006 that a
failed drug test led to his general discharge, he provided an explanation that
contradicted his 2006 interrogatory responses. In considering this information, I am
cognizant that the SOR does not allege any other falsifications. However, unlisted
adverse information has probative value in weighing an applicant’s credibility. I conclude
Applicant intended to conceal the circumstances of his resignation when he omitted it
from his security clearance application. AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation.
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems
Under this guideline, “noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or
regulations pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.” (AG ¶ 39)
Information technology systems include “all related computer hardware, software,
7
firmware, and data used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation,
storage, or protection of information.” (Id.)
Applicant committed several information technology infractions including creating
scripts within a directory and installing an editor without permission. The disqualifying
conditions set forth in AG ¶¶ 40(e), “unauthorized use of a government or other
information technology system,” and 40(f), “introduction, removal, or duplication of
hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information technology system
without authorization when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations,”
apply.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily
available; and
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of
supervisor.
Applicant modified his company’s Government client’s information technology
system to make it better-organized, improve its efficiency, and make it more fail-safe. In
the process, he was unaware he was violating any Government regulations or protocol,
and had no reason to know he was violating any regulations or protocol because a
Government employee was assisting him in completing the tasks.
Before this episode in 2003, Applicant had no history of information technology
violations, and has committed none since then. AG ¶¶ 41(a) and 41(b) apply, and the
first prong of AG ¶ 41(c)  applies.
Subparagraph 3.b of the Guideline M paragraph cross-alleges the falsification
allegation set forth in Guideline E, subparagraph 2.a. Although Applicant’s conduct, as
set forth under subparagraph 2.a, constitutes a security concern under Guideline E, the
conduct is not covered under Guideline M. Consequently, I have resolved subparagraph
3.b in Applicant’s favor, not because the underlying conduct was mitigated, but because
the Government erroneously alleged it under Guideline M. 
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Applicant deserves credit for mitigating the financial considerations security
concern. Also, his job performance is so outstanding that his employer paid his most
significant delinquency, in an effort to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s misuse
of information technology was minor, isolated, and remote in time. Applicant however,
failed to overcome the negative ramifications of his falsification of his 2006 security
clearance application. Upon considering this case in the context of the whole-person
concept, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
