                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17215 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
On October 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 22, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 10, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 12, 2008, scheduling the hearing 
for November 24, 2008, at the request of Applicant. On November 18, 2008, Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
requested a continuance, which was unopposed by Department Counsel and the 
request was granted. An amended Notice of Hearing was issued on November 19, 
2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 15, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. 
Applicant and three witnesses testified. Applicant submitted Exhibits (AE) A-O. 
Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 22, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR and provided explanations. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 26 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 
November 2006. He is also a full-time doctorate student in American History. He has 
held an interim security clearance since his employment in 2006 until it was revoked.  
 
 Applicant was born in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (UAE) to parents of 
Indian nationality. His parents were working in the UAE before they immigrated to 
Canada in 1988. They had hoped to immigrate to the United States, but the wait for 
permanent residency was approximately eight years and the wait in Canada was very 
short. Applicant’s father works as a manager in the hotel industry and his mother is a 
small business owner. Both parents became Canadian citizens and renounced their 
Indian citizenship in 1993. As a minor, Applicant also became a Canadian citizen. In 
1994, his parents applied for permanent residency in the U.S. In 1996, they were 
granted permanent residency in the U.S., as was Applicant. Applicant and his parents 
became naturalized U.S. citizens in July 2002. They retained their dual citizenship 
status with Canada. Applicant’s mother lives in Canada and his father lives in the U.S. 
where he continues to work in the hotel industry.1 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in Canada in 1999 and attended college for 
one year there. After his first year of college, during the summer, he worked as a paid 
intern for one of the local offices of a Canadian ministry. He then attended a prestigious 
U.S. university where he graduated in 2003. During the 2000-2001 academic year 
Applicant applied for an academic internship through his university at a prestigious 
school of economics in the United Kingdom (UK). This internship was coordinated 
through his college and the British institution. He was assigned as an unpaid intern to 
the office of a minister in the British government. This internship occurred before 
Applicant was a U.S. citizen. From January 2002 to June 2002, Applicant was a visiting 
student at another prestigious British university. He received a scholarship from his U.S. 
university to participate in the study abroad program. During his vacations from school 
and over the summer he would return to his mother’s home in Canada to visit her. After 
he graduated from college he attended an intensive language program at a U.S. 
1 Tr. 38-44, 63-64. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
college. Applicant was accepted into a two-year master’s program at Oxford University 
in Britain for the academic year beginning in the fall of 2004. While waiting to attend 
school Applicant could not find a job in the U.S. so he returned to Canada where he 
lived with his mother and saved on living expenses. He had hoped to work in the U.S for 
a Congressman, but because he did not have a connection to any district he could not 
get an appointment. From October 2003 to January 2004 he worked the night shift at a 
convenience store; from April 2004 to July 2004 he worked as a tutor for the Salvation 
Army, and he worked one week for the local state assemblyman in his town. He left the 
local assemblyman’s employment after a week when he realized the job was clerical 
work. He had hoped it would be more of a learning position, but it was not.2  
 
 Applicant’s masters program was unfunded so he needed to find a job to pay his 
expenses. While studying at Oxford, during vacations the students are not permitted to 
stay on campus. Applicant needed to also find a place to stay and pay for his expenses. 
He attended a political dinner and met a person who was running a government 
minister’s reelection campaign. He was offered a job with the minister’s campaign 
reelection team. He worked about a month on the campaign. He credibly testified that 
he did not work for the British government as there is a strict separation between 
government employees working on political campaign. He did work for the minister’s 
reelection campaign and the minister is obviously part of the British government. In the 
spring of 2005, Applicant returned to vacation in Canada with his mother. The second 
year of his master’s studies required extensive research which he conducted in the U.S. 
at different academic and historical venues. He then returned to Canada to complete 
the writing of his thesis. In January 2006, Applicant returned to Oxford and completed 
his master’s degree in July 2006.3  
 
While at Oxford Applicant become friends with a British citizen (Citizen P) whose 
mother is a Russian citizen and father a British citizen. Citizen P completed his 
undergraduate degree in Russia and was doing his graduate work at Oxford. In 2006 
Applicant visited Russia for ten days. The purpose of the trip was for sightseeing and 
also to see if he could gain access to Russian archives to do research on a project. 
When Applicant traveled to Russia, he used his American passport. Applicant stayed at 
the Russia family home of Citizen P. The Russian government denied Applicant access 
to their archives.4  
 
Applicant has maintained some contact with Citizen P through emails since 
completing his studies abroad. Their primary relationship is based on their mutual 
academic interests. Citizen P is an accomplished scholar who is working on his 
doctorate and Applicant is hoping that Citizen P will be invited by his university to 
2 Tr. 44-57; 71-73, 97-104, 113-115; AE N. 
 
3 Tr. 90-97. 
 
4 Tr. 57-60, 74-76, 104-110. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
present his research at an academic gathering. Applicant provided all of his email 
correspondence with Citizen P since he left the university.5  
 
After completing his masters degree Applicant returned to Canada to visit his 
mother, before moving to the U.S. where he was accepted into a doctoral program at 
another prestigious university. Through his contacts at the university he was offered a 
job as a contractor with the Department of State. He accepted the job in November 
2006 and has been employed with the contractor since them. He is a full-time student, 
teaching assistant, and a part-time contractual employee. He has completed about one 
half of his studies. His job has inhibited him devoting all of his time to working on his 
Ph.D.6 
 
Applicant applied for a visa through Canada in 2004 to attend school in Britain. 
He was not aware that this would have an impact on his future ability to obtain a 
security clearance. He was living in Canada with his mother waiting to attend school 
and applied through Canada out of convenience. He did not have an address in the 
U.S. and it would have required him to travel to the U.S. and mail the application from 
there, return to Canada and wait for the application to be returned to an address in the 
U.S. He decided it was less complicated to apply for it under his Canadian citizenship.7  
 
 While living in Canada from 2003 to 2004 and working at the convenience store 
Applicant fortuitously met a former high school friend. They reacquainted and his friend 
works as a chef locally in Applicant’s home city. His friend is Canadian. When Applicant 
visits the city he and his friend will occasionally get together.8  
 
 Applicant voted in a Canadian national election in 2006 and a local election in 
2005. He has not voted in Canada since because he does not have ties with the 
country. He did not know or understand the security clearance implications when he 
voted. He has also voted in U.S. elections.9 
 
 Applicant was unaware of the security implication created by retaining his 
Canadian citizenship. He credibly testified that since becoming a U.S citizen he has 
always been totally loyal to only the U.S. It was always his intention to live permanently 
in the U.S. He chose to remain in the U.S. to study for his Ph.D even though it would 
take him a longer period of time. His mother has remained in Canada because she 
5 Tr. 104-110; AE I. 
 
6 Tr.59-62, 80-81. 
 
7 Tr. 58-59, 79, 120. 
 
8 Tr. 76-78. 
 
9 Tr. 68-69, 88; AE K. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
wanted to maintain a stable home because his father is in a job that changes locations 
often. She did not want to live in hotel rooms, so she stayed in Canada.10  
 
 Applicant let his Canadian passport expire and formally renounced his Canadian 
citizenship. He credibly stated that he was never asked to relinquish his Canadian 
citizenship. Had he been asked he would have willingly done so. He believed that his 
sole willingness to renounce his Canadian citizenship was sufficient and did not believe 
a formal renunciation was necessary. He has since formally, unconditionally, and 
without reservation renounced his Canadian citizenship.11 His only ties to Canada are 
his mother and his younger brother who live there. His brother hopes to move to the 
U.S. in the future.12  
 
 Appellant has approximately $40,000 in assets all located in the U.S. He has no 
assets in any other country.13 
 
 A government employee who has worked with Applicant and is the “Top Secret 
Control and Alternate Unit Security Officer” testified on behalf of Applicant. He considers 
Applicant to be one of the most honest employees he has worked with. He is more 
conscientious than any one of his other employees and during the two years Applicant 
held an interim security clearance he adopted every security practice and scrupulously 
maintained “a need to know” protection of classified information. Applicant has a strong 
code of ethics and is the least likely person he knows who would succumb to social 
pressures. He is meticulous in the quality of his work and his complete loyalty to the 
U.S. is unquestioned. If he was to choose his own successor to maintain the protection 
of classified information, he would choose Applicant.14 
  
 Applicant’s direct supervisor, a State Department employee testified on behalf of 
Applicant. He deals with classified information on a daily basis. He met Applicant in 
November 2006 and Applicant has worked directly for him since April 2007. He believes 
Applicant has consistently demonstrated that he is trustworthy and honest. Applicant is 
a role model in handling classified information. He believes Applicant’s loyalty is to the 
U.S.15  
 
 A coworker who has worked with Applicant on a project since April 2007 testified 
on behalf of Applicant. He stated Applicant always followed all of the security rules and 
10 Tr. 80. 
 
11 AE A, B, C, D, E, F, G. 
 
12 Tr. 65-68, 118-119. 
 
13 Tr. 80-82; AE J. 
 
14 Tr. 135-142. 
 
15 Tr. 144-151. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
is one of the hardest workers he knows. He implicitly trusts him and respects and knows 
Applicant was very proud when he became a U.S. citizen.16  
 
 At his present job Applicant coauthored an article for the Agency’s magazine. It 
references him as a Ph.D student and noted his commitment to a nationally important 
and prestigious project he has been working on.17 
 
Canada18 
 
 “The relationship between the United States and Canada is the closest and most 
extensive in the world.” There is a staggering volume of trade and people to people 
contact with over 300,000 people crossing the border daily. The two countries work 
closely in a vast number of fields ranging from law enforcement to environmental 
protection and on multiple government levels from federal to local. Canada considers its 
good relations with the U.S. critical to a wide range of interests and often looks to the 
U.S. as a common cause partner, promoting democracy around the world. The U.S. 
defense arrangements with Canada are more extensive than with any other country. 
The two military forces have cooperated since 1958 on continental air defense within 
the North American Aerospace Defense Command. The U.S. and Canada enjoy an 
economic partnership unique in the world. The two nations share the world’s largest and 
most comprehensive trading relationship. The U.S. is Canada’s leading agricultural 
market. The two countries enjoy the largest energy trade relationship and one of the 
largest investment relationships in the world.  
 
United Kingdom19 
 
 The United Kingdom is one of the United States’ closest allies. British foreign 
policy is closely coordinated with the U.S. Their bilateral cooperation is reflected in their 
common language, ideals, and democratic practices. The two countries’ alliances were 
strengthened during both World Wars and as founding members of NATO, the Korean 
conflict, in the Persian Gulf War and Operation Iraqi Freedom. The two countries 
continually consult on major issues, such as foreign policy, global problems, and 
security policy objectives. The United Kingdom is the fifth largest market for U.S. goods 
exports and the sixth largest supplier of U.S. imports. It is also a large source for U.S. 
tourists and visa-versa. The two countries share the world’s largest foreign direct 
investment partnership.  
 
 
 
16 Tr.124-132. 
 
17 AE O. 
 
18 AE M: U.S. Department of State: Background Note: Canada, November 2008. All of the 
information about Canada is taken from this document. 
 
19 AE L: U.S. Department of State: Background Note: United Kingdom, July 2008. 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises: “When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: I have specifically considered AG ¶ 10 (a) (“exercise of any right, privilege 
or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member, including but not limited to (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport… (7) voting in a foreign election”); (b) (“action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen”) and (c) (“performing or 
attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as to serve the interests of a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in conflict with the national security 
interests”). Applicant was a dual citizen of Canada and United States. He used his 
Canadian passport when applying for a student visa to attend school in the United 
Kingdom. He voted in a Canadian election after he was a U.S. citizen. He worked for a 
week for a Canadian ministry office and served as an intern and campaign worker for a 
member of the British ministry. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
I have considered all the mitigating conditions applicable to this guideline. 
Specifically I have considered AG ¶ 11 (a) (“dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ 
citizenship or birth in a foreign country”); (b) (“the individual has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship”); (c) (“exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of 
foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor”); (e) (“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated”), and (f) (“the vote in a foreign 
election was encouraged by the United States Government”). Applicant became a 
citizen of Canada when he was a minor and through his parents. He later became a 
naturalized citizen of the U.S. along with his parents. He was unaware that to extinguish 
any security clearance implications he needed to express a willingness to renounce his 
dual citizenship with Canada. Since becoming aware he has formally renounced his 
citizenship ties with Canada. His Canadian passport is no longer valid. Applicant did use 
it as a matter of convenience when he was applying for visa. Applicant is a loyal U.S. 
citizen who was a young college student when he used his passport. He also voted in a 
Canadian election not truly understanding the significance or impact it would have on 
him applying for a security clearance. He credibly testified that he is loyal to only one 
country and that is the U.S. His unpaid internship with a British minister was an 
educational opportunity that is encouraged by colleges and universities. In addition, I 
find Applicant’s employment working for a British minister’s campaign was a means of 
employment so Applicant could pay his expense. It was quite simply a job and an 
educational experience and not a political statement. Applicant needed to make money 
to support himself and found an interesting educational job. While living in Canada 
 
9 
 
 
waiting to attend Oxford he worked for one week for a local minister’s office. Applicant’s 
jobs in the United Kingdom and Canada were means to make money and not a 
reflection of his loyalty to another country. He worked in Canada because he could not 
find a job in the U.S. He was able to live with his mother and save money. I do not find 
based on these contacts and actions that he would be prone to make decisions that are 
harmful to the interest of the U.S. because of his ties to Canada or the United Kingdom, 
clearly two of the U.S. strongest allies.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: “Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The SOR alleged under this guideline that Applicant’s mother, father, and 
brother are dual citizens of Canada and the U.S. It also alleged that after becoming a 
U.S. citizen he lived in Canada primarily when he was not attending school in the U.S. 
or United Kingdom and he held jobs in Canada during some of that time. He also 
exchanged emails with a British citizen who is studying in the United Kingdom but has 
family in Russia. Applicant also visits with a high school friend when Applicant is in 
Canada. The friend is Canadian and lives in Canada. I have considered all of the 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7. (a) (“contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion”); (b) (“connections to a foreign person, 
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual ‘s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desires to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information”); (d) 
(“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that 
relationship creates a heightened  risk of foreign inducement, manipulation , pressure or 
coercion”) and (e) (“a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation”). I have carefully 
reviewed all of the allegations and the facts of this case. The countries of interest are 
Canada and the United Kingdom, two of the United States’ strongest and most loyal 
allies, not countries that are known to target U.S. citizens. Applicant’s contacts with dual 
citizens of Canada and the U.S. do not create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. The time Applicant lived and worked in 
Canada and lived, worked and studied in the United Kingdom also does not create a 
 
10 
 
 
security concern. Applicant does not have divided loyalties and credibly testified that he 
is loyal to only the U.S. All of Applicant’s financial interests are in the U.S. I do not find 
exchanging emails with a citizen of the United Kingdom who has family ties in Russia or 
visiting a Canadian citizen when he is in Canada creates a security concern. After 
careful consideration of all of the above facts and even taking the most expansive 
interpretation of the disqualifying conditions I find none of them apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who 
immigrated with his parents to Canada first because they could obtain permanent 
residency quicker than in the U.S. Once eligible they became U.S. citizens. He was a 
college student in the U.S. and was offered the opportunity to study abroad in the 
United Kingdom. He was also offered an educational opportunity to intern with the 
British government. Later to earn money he was a paid campaign worker. His work was 
to earn money not promote a political cause. Applicant would return to his mother’s 
home in Canada during vacation periods and summer recess. He was unaware of the 
security ramifications in retaining his Canadian passport and has renounced his 
Canadian citizenship and his passport has expired. He did vote in a Canadian election 
in 2006. Applicant is earning his doctorate degree in American History. He has worked 
for the past two years with an interim clearance and his supervisors and coworker are 
confident that his loyalty is only to the U.S. and he is vigilant in his security awareness. 
Based on all of the evidence and my analysis above, the record leaves me with no 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    For APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
