                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-09492 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From 1972 to about 2003 or 2004, Applicant engaged in sexual activity with 
prostitutes. In 2007, he provided false information to a Department of Defense (DoD) 
investigator and in his 2007 response to DoD Hearing and Appeals Office (DOHA) 
interrogatories concerning the recency of his sexual activity with prostitutes. He 
mitigated the security concern under Guideline D because his conduct was not recent; 
however, he failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines E and J. Access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 25, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 4). 
On December 31, 2007, the DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the DoD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), E 
(Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct) (Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On January 18, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 21, 2009, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted: (1) periodically engaging in 
sexual conduct at massage parlors and with prostitutes from 1972 until approximately 
2003; (2) his access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) was denied by 
another agency in 2004; and (3) he failed to fully disclose his sexual conduct to a DoD 
investigator in 2007. He admitted he provided some information about his sexual 
conduct with prostitutes and at massage parlors; however, he denied that on February 
9, 2007, he intentionally provided false information to a DoD investigator. He also 
admitted that on October 6, 2007, he reviewed his February 9, 2007 statement to a DoD 
investigator; however, he denied that he intentionally failed to correct the false 
information that was in the statement generated by the DoD investigator. He also 
provided clarifications and explanations about the various SOR subparagraphs, and 
expressed embarrassment and regret for his conduct (Item 2). After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 He is a systems 
support engineer. From 1970 to 1979, he served on active duty in the Air Force as an 
enlisted man and then from 1979 to August 2002 as an officer. He retired in the grade of 
Lieutenant Colonel. In 2005, he received a master’s degree in communications 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 25, 2009, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated September 4, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that 
he had 30 days after his receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
January 25, 2006, security clearance application (Item 4). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
technology. He married in 1973, and he separated from his spouse in 2003. His children 
were born in 1974 and 1977. 
 
Applicant has never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse 
circumstances. His file does not contain any adverse information relating to police 
involvement. For example, he has never been charged with a felony, any firearms or 
explosives offense(s), and does not have any currently pending charges. He has never 
been charged with any offense related to alcohol or drugs. Hs file does not contain any 
information showing he has been arrested for or charged with any other misdemeanor-
level offenses. There is no evidence that he has abused alcohol or drugs. His file does 
not contain any adverse financial information. 
 
In 2004, another government agency denied Applicant eligibility for access to SCI 
information because he paid prostitutes, escort services, and massage parlors for 
sexual services from 1972 to 2003 (SOR ¶ 2.a; Items 2 at 2, 5). 
  
Sexual Behavior 
  
Applicant admitted he engaged in sexual conduct with prostitutes and received 
manual and oral sexual gratification at massage parlors from 1972 to 2003 or 2004 
(SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 2 at 2, 5). He paid prostitutes, escort services, and massage parlors 
and received sexual services (SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 2 at 2; 7 at 2). Applicant provided 
specific information about receiving sexual acts, such as intercourse, as well as manual 
and oral stimulation in exchange for money at massage parlors in three different states 
in 1994, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003 (Item 7 at 2-3; Item 8 at 1). He 
engaged in similar conduct in Japan from 1981 to 1986 (Item 7 at 3). He ceased such 
activities in 2004 (Item 2 at 2). He is ashamed and embarrassed about his sexual 
conduct. He does not intend to resume such sexual activities. Applicant’s wife knows 
about his extra-marital sexual activities (Item 5 at 6). 
 
False statements 
 
On February 9, 2007, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
asked Applicant about sexual activity outside of his marriage. DoD sought such 
information for the purpose of determining whether he should have access to classified 
information (Item 5 at 8). The OPM investigator described Applicant‘s disclosure as 
follows: 
 
He answered yes to having engaged in sexual activity outside of marriage. 
Further questioning revealed that he routinely engaged in extra-marital 
sexual activities with prostitutes. From 1972 to 1986, while he was 
married, he sought out prostitutes and paid for sex. He engaged in this 
behavior wherever he was stationed in the U.S. or outside the country in 
Japan.   
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
He does not recall how often he did this or what he paid. He does not 
recall the exact locations of these activities, but recalls generally 
prostitutes could be found in alleys so he walked the back alleys, once or 
twice a month, looking for prostitutes. He engaged in this behavior 
because he had a strong sexual appetite and liked the excitement. 
 
He was never arrested because of this activity and he never had any 
encounter of any kind with law enforcement because of this activity. He 
has not engaged in this activity since 1986. He has no intention of doing it 
in the future. Based on their evaluation of the polygraph, and the admitted 
past activity, [the other agency] would not grant him an SCI clearance.    
 
Applicant’s February 9, 2007, statement to an OPM investigator (emphasis added).  
 
DOHA sent Applicant interrogatories and a copy of his February 9, 2007 OPM 
subject interview and asked him to authenticate or provide corrections to this OPM 
subject interview. Applicant provided a seven-page typed discussion of the OPM subject 
interview as part of his response to interrogatories. The discussion included numerous 
corrections and clarifications, including spelling, dates, locations, names, and the 
context of his actions. On October 6, 2007, he swore his responses to the 
interrogatories were true and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief. In regard 
to the above three paragraphs, he quoted the OPM summary and then provided 
detailed commentary. He stated: 
 
.  .  .  Although I did engage in extramarital sexual encounters, I do not 
consider it “routinely.” The “prostitutes” I referred to were employees at 
massage parlors who offered extra services, in which I frequently 
accepted in exchange for a monetary tip. I did not engage in this behavior 
“wherever he was stationed.” I do admit engaging in that immoral behavior 
many times [because] it was available.  
 
I was very embarrassed to admit these activities to the interviewer, but 
tried to provide accurate information as I remembered. When I said that 
“prostitutes could be found in alleys .  .  .  .” I was referring to my first 
overseas assignment to Taiwan from 1972 to 1973. During breaks from 
work, several friends and I would “bar hop” in Taipei, Taiwan. As we 
traveled from bar to bar, street walkers (prostitutes) would proposition us 
for sex in exchange for money. When we accepted, the ladies would take 
us to a building in the alley, usually where they lived, where the deed was 
performed. The report makes it sound like I walked through alleys looking 
for prostitutes. That is not accurate.  .  .  . 
 
He did not include a correction of his statement to the OPM investigator that he 
“has not engaged in this activity since 1986” in his response to DOHA interrogatories. 
On October 6, 2007, he signed his explanatory statement. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
As indicated previously, Applicant’s January 18, 2008 SOR response admits that 
he engaged in sexual activity with women from escort services and/or visited massage 
parlors from 1972 until approximately 2003 or 2004 (Item 2). He explained that he failed 
to disclose his sexual activities after 1986 to the OPM investigator because he “was 
embarrassed and did not want to recall those times [he] was not proud of.” (Item 2). His 
SOR response admits that his response to DOHA interrogatories failed to correct the 
misstatement in the OPM interview.     
       
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), E (Personal Conduct), and J 
(Criminal Conduct).  
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior stating: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four conditions relating to sexual behavior that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
Applicant admitted that he engaged in sexual conduct with women employed by 
escort services and massage parlors for money on numerous occasions from 1972 to 
2003 or 2004. He engaged in this conduct in several states (not Nevada) and overseas. 
His conduct in the United States was of a criminal nature. AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d) apply. 
 
Although he was ashamed of his behavior, he is not vulnerable to coercion 
because security personnel and others, including his wife, are well aware of his 
conduct. He stopped his illegal sexual behavior in 2003 or 2004. There is no evidence 
that he has a personality disorder. AG ¶¶ 13(b) and 13(c) do not apply.     
 
AG ¶ 14 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
  
 AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c) apply. His sexual behavior is a misdemeanor-level 
criminal offense. He stopped engaging in this sexual misconduct in 2003 or 2004. He is 
unlikely to continue to engage in such conduct. Security officials and others are well 
aware of his sexual offenses. Accordingly, the sexual behavior no longer serves as a 
basis for coercion, exploitation or duress.  
 
The other mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant committed the sexual 
behavior at issue, and the conduct continued until he was in his 50s. AG ¶ 14(a) does 
not apply because he was not an adolescent. He did not carry his burden of establishing 
the conduct was strictly private, consensual, and discreet. AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process the 
adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.4 
 
On February 9, 2007, Applicant deliberately made a false statement to an OPM 
investigator, when he said he ended his sexual activity with prostitutes and employees 
of escort services and massage parlors in 1986. On October 6, 2007, in response to a 
DOHA interrogatory, he made a false sworn statement when he acknowledged his 
February 9, 2007 OPM statement was accurate with respect to ending his sexual 
activity with prostitutes and employees of escort services and massage parlors in 1986. 
He actually continued to pay women to engage in such sexual activity with him until 
2003 or 2004.  AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
 
4The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s false 
statements cannot be mitigated at this time because they are too serious and too 
recent.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 by 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
making two false statements on February 9, 2007 to an OPM investigator and on 
October 6, 2007 in response to DOHA interrogatories. Although he said he provided 
false information to DoD because of his embarrassment, I conclude that he recognized 
that his revelations about sexual misconduct resulted in the other agency’s denial of his 
clearance, and he deliberately provided false information about the recency of his 
sexual misconduct in an attempt to obtain a security clearance from DoD under false 
pretenses.    
 
For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to occur, the falsification must be material. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995), as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of 
influencing, the decision making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States 
v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004).    
 
  If Applicant had provided accurate answers to the OPM investigator and in 
response to DOHA interrogatories about ending his sexual activity with prostitutes, and 
employees of escort services and massage parlors in 2003 or 2004, his accurate 
answers were capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His 
thirty years of sexual misbehavior, including numerous misdemeanor-level crimes up to 
2003 or 2004, caused another agency to revoke his security clearance. In 2007, his 
sexual misbehavior was still sufficiently recent, derogatory information5 which 
reasonably could have jeopardized approval of his security clearance. Making a false 
statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential 
sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine). Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and 31(c) apply because Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001.   
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
5 In Applicant’s case, this includes aspects such as the seriousness of the misconduct, and the 
number of violations of the law, regardless of whether the misconduct resulted in an arrest or conviction. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 fully apply. Applicant’s false 
statements occurred in 2007, which is somewhat recent. It casts doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. He was not pressured or coerced 
into making his false statements.  His false statements are substantiated.  
 
AG ¶ 31(d) partially applies. There is some evidence of successful rehabilitation, 
including the passage of about two years since his false statements without additional 
criminal activity. Although he expressed his remorse, embarrassment, and shame for 
his sexual conduct, he denied that he deliberately and intentionally provided false 
information. He has not accepted responsibility for his two false statements in 2007. He 
has received some job training, and has an outstanding employment record serving in 
the Air Force. However, his post-offense behavior is insufficient to fully mitigate the very 
serious misconduct in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D, E, and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He has not committed any sexual offenses since 2003 or 2004. The sexual 
offenses occurring in the United States are misdemeanor-level offenses involving his 
payments for sexual acts as opposed to felony-level crimes. He served on active duty 
more than 30 years and retired from the Air Force in the grade of Lieutenant Colonel. 
Applicant significantly contributed to the national defense over his lengthy career. There 
is no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. There is no evidence of drug or 
alcohol abuse. There is no evidence of disloyalty. There is no evidence that he would 
intentionally violate national security, or that he would fail to safeguard sensitive or 
classified information. His character and good work performance show substantial 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.    
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Because of his background, military experience, and years of holding a high-level 
security clearance, Applicant was well aware of the importance of providing accurate 
information in the context of evaluating and retaining a security clearance. After another 
federal agency revoked his security clearance because of his sexual conduct with 
prostitutes and employees of escort services and massage parlors, Applicant was on 
notice that DoD might deny his clearance, if he revealed that his sexual indiscretions 
continued until 2003 or 2004. In 2007, he intentionally lied to an OPM investigator and 
falsely claimed that he stopped his sexual indiscretions in 1986. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, he failed to correct his false claim to the OPM investigator that he ended 
his inappropriate sexual conduct in 1986, which was about 21 years earlier. When he 
responded to the SOR, he failed to take full responsibility for his attempts in 2007 to 
deceive the DoD. His two false statements in 2007 are felonies because they violate 18 
U.S.C. § 1001 and cannot be mitigated at this time. His two false statements in 2007 
were knowledgeable, voluntary, and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. These two crimes show lack of judgment and a failure to 
abide by the law. Such conduct establishes a serious security concern, and access to 
classified information is not warranted at this time. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to criminal 
conduct and personal conduct. His sexual behavior is mitigated because it ended in 
2003 or 2004, and it is not recent.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”6 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b and 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
