1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11743
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Between May and August of 2005, Applicant abused his administrative privileges
as a network analyst by accessing the e-mails of an employee of the Department of
Defense without her knowledge or consent. Some of the e-mails were classified. This
behavior generates security concerns under Guidelines E, personal conduct, M, misuse
of information technology systems, and K, handling protected information. Applicant
disclosed this adverse information to his current employer before beginning employment
in October 2005. Since then, he has maintained a Top Secret clearance, and his on-the-
job conduct and professionalism have been exemplary. Applicant has mitigated the
security clearance concerns. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security concern under Guidelines
E, Personal Conduct, M, Misuse of Information Technology, and K, Handling Protected
Information. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
2
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2009, admitting all of the allegations
except SOR ¶ 1.c. The case was assigned to me on July 28, 2009. On August 12, 2009,
a notice of hearing was issued scheduling the case for September 9, 2009. The hearing
was conducted as scheduled. I received 5 government exhibits, 10 Applicant exhibits,
and the testimony of 4 Applicant witnesses. The transcript was received on October 17,
2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old married man with three children ages 18, 13, and 12.
He is a veteran of the United States Army where he served from 1995, directly after
finishing high school, to 2003 when he was honorably discharged (Tr. 97). According to
his supervisor during his last two years in the Army, he “demonstrated excellent
performance in decision-making and pertinent information, and safeguard[ing] security”
(Tr. 51). After leaving the Army, Applicant entered college, earning a bachelor’s degree
in computer systems in March 2008 (Tr. 99).
Shortly after leaving the military in 2003, Applicant began working for a defense
contractor as a network administrator on classified systems (Tr. 98). Among other
things, he managed the help desk. Also, when military clients were deployed abroad,
Applicant was responsible for setting up their network systems at their respective duty
stations (Tr. 123). In December 2004, Applicant held a part-time job with another
defense contractor where he performed similar work (Exhibit 4 at 11; Tr. 108).
In late 2004, Applicant began working on the computer network of a female
enlisted military member who had recently deployed abroad (Tr. 152). He performed
this task through his primary employer. Although Applicant rarely saw the enlisted
military member, they became friends. When she returned to the U.S. in January 2005,
they became romantically involved (Tr. 122). Applicant did not tell her that he was
married (Tr. 100). 
In approximately April 2005, Applicant’s girlfriend began to suspect he was
married. After calling his home and speaking to his wife, she ended the relationship (Tr.
29). Applicant has not spoken with his ex-girlfriend since then (Tr. 101).
Applicant was concerned about his ex-girlfriend’s well-being after their
relationship ended (Tr. 118). In May 2005, he began accessing her work e-mails “to
make sure [she] was okay” (Tr.118). His employer did not authorize him to read her e-
mail, and she was unaware that he was accessing them (Exhibit 2 at 6). Some of the e-
mails contained classified information (Answer at 1). Over the next three months,
3
Applicant accessed her e-mail approximately 25 times (Exhibit 2 at 6). At the time,
Applicant held a Top Secret clearance with access to Sensitive Compartmented
Information (SCI) (Tr. 104). 
Applicant knew his conduct violated his company policies regarding the
appropriate use of information systems (Tr. 105). Also, he knew that his conduct could
result in his dismissal, if discovered (Answer at 1; Tr. 127). 
Unbeknownst to Applicant, his ex-girlfriend had configured her e-mail to send
electronic receipts to confirm that individuals whom she e-mailed had read her
correspondence (Id.). In approximately September 2003, she received a return receipt
from Applicant’s e-mail address for a message that she did not send him (Id.). She
became suspicious, and reported what she had learned to the agency’s inspector
general (Id.). 
The agency’s inspector general’s office then conducted an investigation (Id.). On
the afternoon of September 28, 2005, after confirming that Applicant wrongfully
accessed the e-mails, an investigative agent questioned Applicant (Exhibit 2 at 6).
Applicant admitted to the misconduct. Consequently, the agency then notified
Applicant’s employer, immediately revoked his SCI access, confiscated his badges, and
escorted him from the building (Tr. 106). Earlier that day, Applicant had given his
employer two-weeks notice of his resignation so that he could take a position with the
company with whom he currently works (Exhibit 2 at 6). Applicant did not know he was
under investigation when he resigned (Tr. 106). In an interoffice memo, a human
resources representative from Applicant’s ex-employer characterized the relationship
between his resignation and the subsequent discovery of his misconduct as coincidental
(Exhibit 3 at 4). 
When Applicant returned home, he notified his part-time employer of the incident,
and asked if he could still work there (Tr. 107). He had submitted his two-weeks notice
to his part-time employer at the same time he had submitted it to his primary employer
(Id.). His part-time employer refused his request, and allowed him to leave without
working the last two weeks (Id.).
The facility security officer (FSO) of Applicant’s current employer interviewed him
in early October, as part of a routine background check (Tr. 70 - Testimony of FSO). At
the time of the interview, the FSO had approximately 25 years of experience working in
the defense security field (Tr. 70). The company’s program manager had already
extended Applicant a job offer (Tr. 72). Before the interview, the FSO performed a
routine check of Applicant’s security clearance history through the Department of
Defense Security Service’s Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS). It revealed
that Applicant’s SCI had been revoked, and that he retained a Top Secret clearance (Tr.
75). When the FSO asked about the circumstances surrounding the revocation of his
SCI access, Applicant discussed it honestly and remorsefully (Tr. 75, 79).
4
The FSO was perplexed as to how Applicant lost his SCI access, but retained his
Top Secret clearance (Tr. 77). He testified to the following conversation with a DSS
representative:
I said, ‘I’ve spoken to the Program Manager, and they want to hire this
individual, but I’m leery about hiring him, because if we hire him, will they
turn around in 30 days based on this event and pull his clearance?’
And they said, . . . ‘anything can happen tomorrow or the next day, but as
of today, he is a cleared individual who can be hired and use his Top
Secret clearance . . .’ (Tr. 78). 
The FSO then went to the company president and told her that “the government
has chosen not to pull Applicant’s Top Secret clearance, [and he was not] in a position
right now . . .  to think that [Applicant] could be . . . put in a position to compromise his
clearance information” (Tr. 79).
Applicant was then hired for a one-year probationary period (Tr. 77). During this
period, the FSO closely monitored him, speaking to the program manager quarterly, and
observing his work relationships (Tr. 80, 82). Applicant successfully completed the
probationary period (Tr. 81). Also, he has completed multiple security trainings over the
past four years (see generally, Exhibit H). In sum, he has demonstrated “impeccable
character and security awareness” since working for his current employer (Tr. 83). 
Applicant has completely rebuilt his wife’s level of trust with him (Tr. 32). She
characterized their current relationship as “great” (Tr. 32). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” Applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). 
Applicant while serving the Department of Defense as a network analyst had an
affair with a woman whom he met while installing her information systems network as
part of his job duties. After she ended the affair, he abused his network privileges by
accessing her e-mails without her permission or his employer’s authorization, on 25
occasions. AG ¶ 16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . .
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or
community standing,” applies.
Applicant’s contention that his resignation from his employer was unrelated to
their discovery of his misconduct is supported by his ex-employer’s internal memoranda
that the government submitted. I conclude that he did not resign from his employment in
lieu of being fired, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. I resolve SOR 1.c in Applicant’s
favor.
Applicant’s inappropriate workplace behavior calls into question his
trustworthiness. However, I decline to apply AG ¶ 16(d)(1), “untrustworthy or unreliable
behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other government protected information,”
or AG ¶ 16(d)(2), “disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace,”
or AG ¶ 16(d)(4), “evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s
time or resources.”All of these factors accurately characterize his conduct; however,
their applicability under Guideline E is predicated on Applicant’s conduct not being
“explicitly covered under any other guideline” (AG ¶ 16(d)). Applicant’s conduct is
covered under both Guidelines M, Use of Information Technology Systems (AG ¶¶ 39-
41), and K, Handling Protected Information, (AG ¶¶ 33-35), rendering their discussion
under these particular Guideline E disqualifying conditions superfluous.
Applicant reconciled with his wife. He has not engaged in additional episodes of
adultery. His current employer was aware of the conduct when it hired him. Applicant
discussed the incident comprehensively and remorsefully with his current employer’s
DoD 5220.22-M, ¶ 8-105.1
6
FSO, who then recommended his hiring, after confirming with DSS that he still retained
a Top Secret clearance. In the four years since working for his current employer, he has
completed multiple security trainings, and has demonstrated outstanding character and
security awareness. AG ¶¶ 17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” and 17(e), “the individual
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress,” apply.
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems
The security concern under this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 39 as follows:
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information technology systems include all related computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
As a network administrator with special access for troubleshooting or monitoring
his company’s information security systems, Applicant was a “privileged user” under the
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual  (NISPOM). Applicant abused1
his privileged user status, and violated company policy by viewing his ex-girlfriend’s e-
mail without her knowledge or consent. Consequently, AG ¶¶ 40(a), “illegal or
unauthorized entry into any information system or component thereof,” and 40(e),
“unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system,” apply.
Applicant’s misconduct occurred four years ago and has not recurred. His current
employer is pleased with his work performance and adherence to security standards.
AG ¶ 41(a), “so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies.
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information
Under this guideline, “deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and
regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard
such information, and is a serious security concern” (AG ¶ 33). Applicant accessed his
ex-girlfriend’s e-mail without authorization. Some of the e-mails Applicant accessed
7
without authorization contained classified information of which he had no need to know.
AG ¶ 34(d), “inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected
information outside one’s need-to-know,” applies. Applicant also violated the NISPOM’s
requirement for privileged information system users to “be accountable for their actions”
on an information system (¶ 8-105c.(3)).
Applicant has not committed any security violations in four years. He has
completed multiple security trainings, and displays an outstanding attitude toward
security awareness. AG ¶¶ 34(a), “so much time has elapsed since the behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” and 34(b), “the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of
security responsibilities,” apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.”
Applicant’s misconduct breached his wife’s trust, his employer’s trust, and the
federal government’s trust when he engaged in an affair with a government employee,
then abused his networking privileges to furtively monitor her e-mail. Applicant had
never engaged in similar conduct in the past, and it has not recurred. His current
employer is highly pleased with his work performance and security awareness.
Applicant has successfully completed multiple security trainings, and enrolled in college
earning a degree in information systems in 2008. Also, he has repaired his relationship
with his wife. The seriousness of Applicant’s conduct is outweighed by the presence of
rehabilitation and the amount of time that has elapsed since its occurrence. Under these
circumstances, the likelihood of recurrence is minimal. Upon considering the applicable
disqualifying and mitigating conditions together with the whole person concept, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline K: FOR Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
