 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09834 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on December 22, 2005 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 5). On June 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on June 30, 2009; answered it on August 7, 2009 
(GX 4); and requested determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received 
his response on August 11, 2009. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
written case on August 27, 2009. On September 1, 2009, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on September 9, 2009, but he did not respond. The 
case was assigned to me on November 3, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR 1.b through 
1.r. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old data monitor employed by a federal contractor. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1990 to June 2002. After his 
release from active duty, he was unemployed until January 2003. His security clearance 
application reflects that he has been employed by federal contractors since January 
2003, except for a one-week period of unemployment in mid-January 2005. That period 
of unemployment ended when he was hired by his current employer. He does not have 
a security clearance. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in December 2005, 
he answered “no” to question 27 on his security clearance application, asking if any 
judgments had been filed against him in the last seven years that were unpaid. He also 
answered “no” to question 28, asking if he was currently more than 90 days delinquent 
on any debts. His credit report dated January 18, 2006 reflected an unsatisfied 
judgment entered against him in July 2004 for $2,107, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (GX 10 
at 3). The same credit report also reflected the $1,436 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, 
charged off in March 2005; the $209 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j, charged off in February 
2004; the $878 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, sent to collection in March 2005; and the 
$482 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q, sent to collection in 2002 (GX 10 at 4-6, 8-9). 
 
 In September 2006, Applicant told a security investigator that the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b arose during a two-month period of unemployment (GX 6 at 3). His 
security clearance application reflects continuous employment from January 2003 until 
the present, except for a one-week period in January 2005 (GX 5 at 8-12). 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts totaling $21,113. Applicant told a security 
investigator he was disputing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (GX 7 at 3). In his answer to 
the SOR, Applicant stated he had contacted the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and was 
awaiting information, and that he was negotiating a settlement of the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. He admitted all the remaining debts and stated that they would be paid off in 
periods ranging from one month to eight months. He did not respond to the FORM and 
did not submit evidence that any of the debts were resolved. 
 
 3
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied falsifying his security clearance 
application. He stated he did not fully understand the questions (GX 4 at 4). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 4
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised where there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised 
when there is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when 
there is “consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, 
and/or other financial analysis.” Applicant’s financial history raises all three disqualifying 
conditions, shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are numerous, ongoing, and not 
the product of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s 
 5
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant attributed the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.b to a two-month period of unemployment, but that 
explanation is not supported by the information he provided in his security clearance 
application. He has asserted no other circumstances beyond his control. This mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence of financial 
counseling and Applicant’s financial situation is not under control. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant has not presented any evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
suggested to a security investigator that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was disputed, 
but he provided no documentation to show the basis for the dispute or actions to resolve 
it. He has admitted all the other debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 6
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). Applicant’s only explanation for his failure to disclose the 
unsatisfied judgment and his delinquent debts was that he did not fully understand the 
question. He has not explained what he did not understand or what he thought the 
question was asking. He has not claimed he was unaware of the debts. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because the record 
contains no evidence that Applicant made prompt good-faith efforts to correct his 
omissions.  
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s falsification was not a minor offense, it involved his current security 
clearance application, and it did not occur under unique circumstances. The third 
element (“so infrequent”) is established because the two falsifications occurred at the 
same time and there is no other evidence of untruthful behavior, but Applicant’s lack of 
candor on his application casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 7
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked in federal service for many years. He 
has offered little evidence to explain how he accumulated his delinquent debts and 
virtually no evidence of efforts to resolve them. My ability to evaluate his credibility is 
limited, because he did not request a hearing. His explanation for failing to disclose the 
derogatory financial information on his security clearance application is facially 
implausible.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
