                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03999 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has property in France, is a French citizen, has a French bank account, 
and holds a French-sponsored security clearance. She has received social and medical 
benefits based on her French citizenship. She wants to continue to receive the benefits of 
French citizenship. Security concerns pertaining to foreign preference are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for a U.S. security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 14, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her (GE 7) pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised; and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleges security concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference) (GE 7). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her 
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
  
On July 30, 2009, Applicant signed her response to the SOR and provided it to 
DOHA on August 3, 2009 (GE 8). On September 10, 2009, Department Counsel 
indicated he was ready to proceed. The case was assigned to me on September 21, 
2009.  
 
At the video teleconference hearing held on October 22, 2009,1 Department 
Counsel offered five exhibits (GE 1-5) (Transcript (Tr.) 18). There were no objections, 
and I admitted GE 1-5 (Tr. 18-19). Applicant offered two exhibits (AE A, B), which were 
admitted into evidence without objection (Tr. 20-21). Additionally, I admitted the Hearing 
Notice (GE 6), SOR (GE 7), and Applicant’s response to the SOR (GE 8). I received the 
transcript on October 29, 2008.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
At the hearing, on my own motion I took administrative notice of some basic facts 
concerning France, as well as about France’s relationship to the United States (Tr. 38-
41).2 I offered the parties an opportunity to object to those facts (Tr. 40-41). I did not 
receive any objections (Tr. 40-41). The specific facts noticed are in the section of this 
opinion labeled “French Republic.”  
 
 
 
 
 
1 Applicant waived her right under Directive ¶ E3.1.8 to 15-days’ notice of date, time, and location 
of her hearing (Tr. 14-15). Applicant was located at an overseas location. Department Counsel and I were 
located in Arlington, Virginia. 
 
2Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen 
types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents). In this case the source for the facts is the U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs April 2009, “Background Note: France,” available at 
http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3842.htm (Administrative Judge’s Exhibit (AJ Ex.) I).  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c with explanations 
(GE 5). For SOR ¶ 1.d, she admitted she had a currently valid French passport; 
however, she denied that she used it to travel in the European Union and noted it was 
not necessary to use a French passport for such travel (GE 5). In regard to SOR ¶ 1.e, 
she admitted that she owned real property in France valued at about $230,000 (GE 5). 
Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 36 years old (Tr. 7, 21). In 1995, she earned a bachelor of arts 
degree in English from a U.S. university (Tr. 7). She married her husband in 1998 (Tr. 
22). Her husband is a French citizen and lives in France (Tr. 24). For at least the last 
five years, her husband has been a school teacher in France (Tr. 37). From 1998 to 
2008, Applicant lived in France (Tr. 24). She currently lives in a nearby European 
country so that she can be closer to her employment (Tr. 24). On May 10, 2004, she 
was hired as a temporary employee at a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
installation (Tr. 5; AE B). On March 1, 2005, she was hired as a permanent employee at 
the NATO installation (AE B).  
  
Foreign Preference 
   
Applicant became a French citizen in 1999 (Tr. 24; GE 3). She became a French 
citizen so that she could receive French employment (GE 3). She needed money to pay 
off her student loans (GE 3). Over the last decade she has received the benefits of 
being a French citizen, such as medical benefits and other social benefits (Tr. 24). She 
received a French passport in 1998 (Tr. 25). Her current French passport is valid until 
2015 (Tr. 25). When she began her employment at NATO and applied for a U.S. 
security clearance, she agreed not to use her French passport (Tr. 26). She recently 
turned her French passport in to the U.S. Mission to NATO, where it was destroyed (Tr. 
25; AE A).  
 
Applicant has a checking and savings account in France (Tr. 22). She does not 
have any bank accounts in the United States (Tr. 35). She has a French NATO security 
clearance (Tr. 8). She and her husband own property in France. The location of the 
property in France is due to geographical convenience rather than political or national 
preference (Tr. 28-29). If she lived in the United States, she would own property in the 
United States (Tr. 28-29). 
 
Applicant has voted in both United States and French elections (Tr. 36). She 
voted in the 2008 U.S. presidential election (Tr. 36). She voted in a French election 
about two years ago (Tr. 36).  
 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.   
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
When Applicant applied for NATO employment, she had to elect her primary 
citizenship (Tr. 30). She selected French citizenship because she received her initial 
employment from a French temporary employment agency, and she was informed that 
a French security clearance would be processed faster than a U.S. security clearance 
(Tr. 30-31). She learned she could immediately receive an interim French security 
clearance and continue her employment (Tr. 31). However, she would have to wait a 
year for a U.S. security clearance and would not be permitted to retain her employment 
until the U.S. security clearance was approved (Tr. 31). She annunciated a preference 
for France for economic reasons and not as an expression of loyalty.  
 
Applicant does not intend to renounce her French citizenship (Tr. 26).4 She 
wanted to retain her French citizenship because it helps with employment in France. 
Her French citizenship makes it possible to receive medical services at a French 
hospital, and it provides a social and financial safety net (Tr. 27). European citizens 
receive priority for employment, and that priority is an important factor in her decision to 
remain a French citizen (Tr. 27). Another factor is her desire to adopt the culture of her 
husband (Tr. 28).  
 
Applicant has been employed at a NATO installation more than five years (AE B). 
Her NATO security officer notes her conscientious treatment of classified, sensitive or 
protected information (AE B).  
 
Applicant wanted her employer (a subdivision of NATO) to consider her to be an 
American (Tr. 32). Being considered a U.S. citizen will improve her employment 
possibilities in NATO (Tr. 33). Americans have an excellent reputation as dedicated, 
hard workers (Tr. 33). She is very proud of her American nationality (Tr. 33). She 
considers her preference to be American over French (Tr. 34). She has a large family in 
the United States, and her family connections are very strong (Tr. 34). She stays in 
contact with her American family and visits the United States whenever possible (Tr. 34, 
35). She enjoys experiencing American food and culture even while she is in Europe. 
For example, she enjoys visiting the American facilities at the U.S. military bases in the 
Kaiserslatuern area of Germany (Tr. 35). 
   
French Republic5 
 
France is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the G-8, the European Union, the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organization and various 
multilateral organizations.  France is America’s oldest ally; French military assistance 
was instrumental in helping Britain’s American colonies establish independence. More 
American soldiers have been killed on French soil (because of World Wars I & II) than 
on that of any other foreign country. France supports the U.S. initiative under Quartet for 
 
4 Failure to offer to renounce or to actually renounce foreign citizenship is not a negative factor 
weighing against approval of a security clearance. 
  
5 AJ Ex. I is the source for the facts in this section. See also Administrative Notice, supra. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
resolving Middle East problems. Since 2003, France has supported four U.N. Security 
Council resolutions in Iraq and provided funds as part of the European Union—Iraq 
contribution. Since 2006, France has joined the United States and others in actively 
discouraging Iran from pursuing nuclear weapons. 
 
The U.S. State Department describes the international relationship with France 
as active and friendly.  The United States and France share common values and have 
parallel policies on most political, economic, and security issues. Differences are 
discussed frankly and have not generally been allowed to impair the pattern of close 
cooperation that characterizes relations between the two countries. France has 
significantly increased participation in NATO’s military wing in recent years. France 
ended conscription in 2002 and is modernizing its military forces. Although France 
opposed the U.S. invasion of Iraq, France has about 2,000 soldiers serving in 
Afghanistan, and assisted in assembling $21 billion in pledges for economic assistance 
to Afghanistan. France is a close ally of the United States in the war on terrorism. In 
December 2007, France convicted five former Guantanamo detainees on terrorism 
charges.   
 
The United States and France have strong economic relationships with each 
other. The United States is France’s sixth-ranked supplier of imports. The United States 
is the top destination for French investments worldwide. The United States is the largest 
foreign investor in France, employing over 619,000 French citizens. France is the 
United States’ eighth trading partner for total goods.   
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in 
this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline C (foreign preference) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 describes the foreign preference security concern stating, “when an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
Applicant became a French citizen, received French social and/or medical 
benefits, and obtained a French passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. Her voting in a 
French election is not a disqualifying condition because she did not receive notice about 
this concern in the SOR. She does not currently possess a French passport. AG ¶¶ 
10(a)(3), 10(b) and 10(d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
AG ¶ 11(e) applies and mitigates any concern about Applicant’s possession of a 
French passport. None of the other mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant was born 
in the United States and her parents are U.S. citizens. She became a French citizen in 
1998 or 1999 even though she was a U.S. citizen. She did not offer to renounce her 
French citizenship. She received French medical/social benefits as an adult after 
leaving the United States and becoming a French citizen.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
under Guideline C in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is considerable evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. 
The foreign preference issue in this case relates to France. The French geopolitical 
situation and France’s relationship with the United States are pertinent factors in this 
analysis.6 France’s relationship with the United States has changed over the decades 
and is likely to change again in the future. France is and has been an important U.S. 
ally; however, on some occasions, such as the U.S. invasion of Iraq, France has 
contested U.S. policy. France currently has an excellent human rights record. France 
has weapons of mass destruction, is an important trading partner, and vigorously 
suppresses terrorism.7 The French relationship with the United States is an important 
factor weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
There are other significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant has lived in the United States for most of her adult life. 
She was born in the United States, and she was educated in the United States through 
her bachelor’s degree. Her parents and siblings are U.S. citizens and residents of the 
United States. Applicant’s deep relationship with her family living in the United States 
and her strong connections to the United States tend to mitigate security concerns. She 
is a law-abiding U.S. citizen, and there is no evidence of any performance or work-
related problems. She is fully inculcated with U.S. values. I found her statements to be 
honest, candid and credible. Her expression of preference for the United States over 
France is credible and given great weight.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant became a French citizen in 1998 or 1999 even though she had 
already held U.S. citizenship from birth in the United States. She was about 25 or 26 
years old when she became a French citizen. She was not a minor. Applicant currently 
has a checking and savings account in France. She does not have any bank accounts 
in the United States. Applicant has a French NATO security clearance. When she 
began her NATO employment, she elected a French nationality over a U.S. nationality 
for economic reasons. She received French medical and/or social benefits as a result of 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
7The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. France 
and the United States have been allies since the Revolutionary War. It is very unlikely that France would 
put Applicant into a position where she would be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and her husband who lives in France. With its strong human rights record, and friendly political and 
military relationship with the United States, it is not conceivable that France would coercively target any 
French citizen or former citizen living outside France in an attempt to gather valuable information from the 
United States. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
her French citizenship. Applicant and her husband own property in France. The location 
of her French property is due to geographical convenience rather than political or 
national preference, and I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant has 
voted in both United States and French elections. She voted in the 2008 U.S. 
presidential election. She voted in a French election about two years ago.  
 
The Appeal Board’s analysis in ISCR Case No. 08-05869 (App. Board July 24, 
2009) is instructive concerning the application of mitigating factors for an applicant with 
a strong foreign preference for Australia, who attempted to re-establish a preference for 
the United States. The Appeal Board reversed the administrative judge’s decision to 
grant a security clearance for a U.S. born citizen, who moved to Australia to be with his 
wife, became an Australian citizen, served in the Australian Army as a commissioned 
officer in an intelligence-related position, and held an Australian security clearance. Id. 
at 2. The Appeal Board cited as error the judge’s interpretation of that applicant’s desire 
to provide for his family as his reason for showing preference for Australia as mitigating, 
whereas the Appeal Board considered this economic motive to be a negative 
demonstration of personal interests taking priority over the interests of the United 
States. Id. at 5. The Appeal Board did not find that applicant’s return to the United 
States more than ten years ago, divorce from his Australian spouse, renunciation of his 
Australian citizenship, and surrender of his Australian passport to be sufficient to re-
establish his preference for the United States over Australia.   
 
After carefully weighing the evidence of her connections to France and to the 
United States, as well as her actions showing preference for each nation, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to carry her burden of mitigating the foreign preference security 
concern.  
 
           I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for a United States security clearance at 
this time.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a U.S. security 
clearance. Her eligibility for a U.S. security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
