 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03974 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 19, 2006. On May 
8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 18, 2009; answered it on June 25, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
 
2 
 
 
23, 2009. On July 29, 2009, Department Counsel withdrew the allegations under 
Guideline E. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 31, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 6, 
2009, scheduling the hearing for September 1, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 14, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working overseas 
as a network controller. He has worked for his current employer since May 2006. He 
received a clearance in September 1996 and has held it continuously until the present 
(Tr. 9). 
 
Applicant began using marijuana in high school, using it at least once a week 
(GX 7 at 8). In 1994, after he graduated from high school, he started using marijuana 
one to three times a week, cocaine one to two times a year, methamphetamine two to 
four times a month, and he used lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) about five times (GX 
7 at 8; Tr. 30). In October 1994, he recognized he was “in a bad state,” and he 
voluntarily entered and completed a two-week, inpatient treatment program (Tr. 31). He 
completed an outpatient aftercare program, consisting of group counseling, in February 
1995.  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from April 1996 to August 1998, 
and was released from active duty as a sergeant (pay grade E-5). He received a 
Certificate of Achievement in March 1998 (AX B-8), and he was twice awarded the 
Army Achievement Medal (AX B-3; AX B-4). He was discharged early to accept an 
Army Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) scholarship (AX B-9; AX B-10). 
 
In 1999, while attending college, Applicant resumed his marijuana use. He 
estimated he used it 10 to 15 times at social occasions at parties and in connection with 
alcohol consumption (Tr. 33-34; GX 3 at 4-5). He dropped out of college after one 
semester and discontinued his participation in ROTC (Tr. 37). He was in the individual 
ready reserve (IRR) from the date of his release from active duty until he joined an 
active U.S. Army Reserve (USAR) unit in January 2003.  
 
Applicant was charged with drunken driving in February 2004. He attended a 
two-day group counseling program for alcohol abuse, mandated as a result of the 
charge of drunken driving (GX 3 at 2).  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s USAR evaluation report for the period from September 2004 through 
August 2005 rated him as “among the best” and recommended assignment to greater 
responsibilities (AX A-1). His evaluation report for the period from September 2005 to 
January 2006 rated him as “fully capable” and described him as mature and 
conscientious (AX A-2). He was awarded the Joint Service Achievement Medal in 
November 2005 (AX B-2). In March 2006, he received a Commanding General’s 
Certificate of Appreciation (AX B-5). Later in the same month, he participated in an 
unannounced urinalysis administered by his USAR unit, and he tested positive for 
marijuana. An action to administratively discharge him for drug involvement was 
initiated but apparently never completed. He was held past his discharge date and 
eventually discharged from the USAR in January 2007 with a general discharge under 
honorable conditions (GX 7 at 9; AX F).  
 
Applicant last used an illegal substance in March 2006, after returning from a 
deployment with his USAR unit (GX 3 at 4; Tr. 15). In June 2006, shortly after he began 
working for his current employer, he voluntarily enrolled in an outpatient substance 
abuse program. Upon entering the program, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent 
and nicotine dependent (AX D-2). He completed the program in August 2007 (GX 3 at 
2). Although he was advised to participate in Alcoholics Anonymous when he entered 
the program, he does not participate in Alcoholics Anonymous or any similar 
organization (GX 3 at 2). He testified he last consumed alcohol on December 31, 2008, 
when he had a single beer with his brother (Tr. 43). He intends to limit his alcohol 
consumption to a single beer or glass of wine on an occasional special event (Tr. 45). 
 
Applicant’s 2007 performance appraisal from his current employer rated him as 
consistently exceeding expectations in his quality of work. His overall rating described 
him as meeting and occasionally exceeding expectations (AX C-1). His 2008 
performance appraisal rated him as meeting and occasionally exceeding expectations 
in all performance factors (AX C-2). 
 
On December 8, 2008, Applicant obtained a follow-up assessment of his 
substance abuse. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in sustained full remission. 
The prognosis was “good given his current lifestyle.” Neither his diagnosis in June 2006 
nor his evaluation in December 2008 mentioned any drug dependence (AX D-1). At the 
hearing, he presented a signed statement of intent to refrain from future drug abuse, 
with provision for automatic revocation of his clearance for any future drug abuse. In his 
statement, he declared that he had not used marijuana since March 2006 and had not 
used any other illegal substances since 1994 (AX E). 
 
Applicant now lives and works overseas, and he has made new friends from 
among his co-workers. He does not associate with heavy drinkers or drug-users (Tr. 
42). He is in a serious relationship with a young woman, and they are awaiting the birth 
of their child in December 2009 (Tr. 42, 55).  
 
Applicant’s colleagues and supervisors uniformly hold him in high regard, 
commenting on his intelligence, dependability, honesty, loyalty, and integrity (AX G-1 
 
4 
 
 
through G-13). His site manager considers him a valuable asset (AX G-1). Another site 
manager commented on his trustworthiness and reliability (AX G-9) A colleague 
commented on his sound moral judgment (AX G-5). A friend mentioned his “rock-
steady’ sound judgment (AX G-8). One colleague described him as a model employee 
(AX G-11). His site manager and one of his colleagues believe he participates in 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AX G-1 and AX G-7), but this belief is contradicted by 
Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories on August 1, 2008 (GX 3 at 2). His 
mother and brother describe him as a changed person who is now focused on the future 
(AX G-12 and G-13). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
5 
 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) 
 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse 
of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses use or misuse of Adrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens). AG 
¶ 24(a)(1).  
The following disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
AG ¶ 25(a): Aany drug abuse,@ which is defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as Athe illegal use 
of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical 
direction.@;  
AG ¶ 25(b): “testing positive for illegal drug use”;  
AG ¶ 25(c):  Aillegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution”; and  
AG ¶ 25(g): “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
All these disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence, shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
 
6 
 
 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
Although Applicant was evaluated for substance abuse on several occasions and 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent, there is no evidence he was ever diagnosed as a drug 
abuser or drug dependent. Thus, AG ¶ 25(d) (“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug 
dependence”) and AG ¶ 25(e) (): “evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program”) are not raised. 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). Applicant’s drug 
involvement was frequent and did not happen under such circumstances that make 
recurrence unlikely. Thus, the analysis turns on the first prong of ¶ 26(a) (Ahappened so 
long ago@), which focuses on the recency of drug involvement. There are no Abright line@ 
rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a 
careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed 
without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine 
whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient 
to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.   
 
Applicant’s most recent marijuana use was in March 2006, three and a half years 
ago. He voluntarily entered and completed a drug treatment program after he was 
discharged from the USAR and began his current employment. He found new friends, 
changed his environment, and demonstrated his intention to remain drug-free. He is 
well regarded by his colleagues, superiors, and friends. I conclude AG ¶ 26(a) is 
established. 
 
Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b). Applicant has established all four indicia of “demonstrated intent” under this 
mitigating condition. 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). Applicant voluntarily entered substance 
abuse treatment programs in October 1994 and in June 2006. Neither was “prescribed” 
by a medical professional. He was diagnosed in October 1994 as alcohol dependent, 
 
7 
 
 
but neither program diagnosed him as suffering from drug dependence or drug abuse. 
He successfully completed both programs. His follow-up evaluation in December 2008 
also diagnosed him as alcohol dependent in full remission, but made no mention of drug 
abuse or drug dependence. The favorable diagnosis in December 2008 referred only to 
his alcohol dependence, and it was made before he consumed alcohol on December 
31, 2008. Applicant receives some credit under this mitigating condition, but it is not fully 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and remorseful at the hearing. He is a talented 
network controller, respected by his colleagues, supervisors, and friends. His drug and 
alcohol problems peaked shortly after he graduated from high school, but he recognized 
his problem and sought help in October 1994. After a successful tour of active duty in 
the Army, he started attending college, but he fell back into his pattern of substance 
abuse and dropped out of school. He last used marijuana in March 2006. When he was 
offered his current job, he voluntarily entered another outpatient treatment program. He 
does not participate in AA or any similar organization, but he has new friends, a job he 
finds rewarding, a serious romantic relationship, and a child soon to be born.  
 
 Applicant’s alcohol dependence and alcohol-related misconduct was not alleged 
in the SOR, but his marijuana use frequently was in conjunction with alcohol 
consumption. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (Uncharged 
misconduct may be considered as part of whole-person analysis.). He has decided to 
consume alcohol infrequently and in moderation, thereby undermining the premise of 
his recent diagnosis as alcohol dependent in full remission. Nevertheless, he has clearly 
 
8 
 
 
demonstrated his intent to leave his hard-drinking, drug-using lifestyle behind. By 
submitting his statement of intent, he has agreed to self-imposed probation, putting his 
job and his future on the line if he uses any illegal substances in the future. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
