1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-09892
SSN: ----------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense
industry. The record shows Applicant engaged in a pattern of multiple lesser offenses
during 2003–2004, when he was a soldier in the U.S. Army. The command imposed
nonjudicial punishment on him on four occasions, and then administratively separated
him from the service due to a pattern of misconduct. Applicant failed to disclose his
record of nonjudicial punishment in his May 2008 security-clearance application; he also
failed to disclose past treatment or counseling for his use of alcohol. The facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s conduct create doubts about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. The record contains insufficient evidence to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, as explained below, this case
is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, Paragraph E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting evidence, which3
will be identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on July 27, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline J for
criminal conduct and Guideline E for personal conduct. Also, the SOR recommended
submitting the case to an administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR on or about August 6, 2009, when his handwritten
response to the SOR was received by the Agency. He requested a decision without a
hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On August 25, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file3
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by him on September
1, 2009. He then had 30 days to submit a documentary response setting forth
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. He did not respond within
the 30-day period. The case was assigned to me November 9, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married in 2004,
and he divorced in 2007. He is now raising a four-year-old son. It appears this is the first
time he has applied for an industrial security clearance, completing an application in
May 2008.  
Applicant completed high school in 2001. He then worked as a clerk for a food
business and a fast-food restaurant until he joined the U.S. Army in 2002. He was
trained as an automated logistical specialist to work in the field of logistics. He was then
assigned to a forward support battalion where he engaged in a pattern of misconduct
that resulted in his early discharge from the Army in 2004. 
 For a detailed discussion of nonjudicial punishment, see David A. Schlueter’s Military Criminal Justice4
Practice and Procedure (4  ed. 1996), Chapter 3, and Army Regulation 27-10, Legal Services–Military Justice,th
Chapter 3.
 Exhibit 7, page 7 of 47.5
 Exhibit 7, page 24 of 47. 6
 Exhibit 7, pages 22–23 of 47. 7
 Exhibit 7, pages 20–21 of 47. 8
3
The SOR alleges that Applicant received nonjudicial punishment on six
occasions while in the Army. But the record establishes four occasions. Nonjudicial
punishment (called Article 15 in the Army and Air Force, captain’s mast in the Navy and
Coast Guard, and office hours in the Marine Corps) is a procedure under military law in
which the commanding officer imposes punishment against a servicemember for a
minor offense under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). Nonjudicial
punishment is not a court-martial, and it does not constitute a conviction.   4
What follows below is a description of Applicant’s record of nonjudicial
punishment based on four records of proceedings under Article 15, UCMJ:  
• April 2003–for violation of a lawful general regulation (underage drinking).  It5
stemmed from a drinking-and-driving incident in March 2003, when Applicant
was involved in an on-post traffic accident by driving into a light pole. He also
received written counseling for driving while impaired and making false
statements stemming from the March 2003 incident.
• January 2004–for disrespectful language toward a noncommissioned officer.6
This Article 15 was imposed using summarized proceedings, which limits the
amount of punishment.
• June 2004–for failure to go to appointed place of duty and two instances of
disobeying a lawful order of a noncommissioned officer.   This Article 15 was7
imposed while Applicant was deployed in Afghanistan.
• July 2004–for disobeying a lawful general order (wrongfully have sexual
intercourse with a female solider) and disobeying a lawful order of the battalion
commander by being present in one of the battalion’s female tents.  This Article8
15 was imposed while Applicant was deployed in Afghanistan. 
The July 2004 Article 15 proceeding resulted in Applicant’s reduction from private first
class (E3) to private (E1) and 45 days of extra day. 
Several days after the last Article 15 was imposed, the Army initiated action to
administratively separate Applicant before the end of his term of service due to a pattern
 Exhibit 7, pages 13, 14, and 15 of 47. 9
 Exhibit 7, page 10 of 47. 10
 Exhibit 6, page 8 of 8. 11
 Exhibit 6, page 8 of 8. 12
 Exhibit 7, page 9 of 47. 13
 Exhibit 7, page 8 of 47. 14
 Exhibit 5. 15
4
of misconduct.  The task force commander approved the separation action on July 24,9
2004.  In doing so, the commander directed that Applicant be discharged and furnished10
a general discharge certificate and not be transferred to the Army’s Individual Ready
Reserve. Applicant was then returned to his battalion’s rear detachment for separation
processing, and he was discharged as ordered on September 29, 2004.  The certificate11
of release or discharge from active duty (commonly known as DD Form 214) shows,
among other things, the following: (1) type of separation–discharge; (2) reason for
separation–pattern of misconduct; and (3) character of service–under honorable
conditions (general).  He was separated from the Army at the lowest enlisted grade of12
private (E1). 
Before his discharge, the command security manager forwarded a copy of the
administrative separation action to the Army’s security-clearance facility with the
commander’s recommendation that Applicant’s security clearance be revoked.13
Applicant’s access to classified information had already been suspended, as the Army
had previously granted Applicant a secret-level security clearance. The Army’s security-
clearance facility intended to use the information to review Applicant’s eligibility, but his
affiliation with the Army ended before a final resolution due to his discharge in
September 2004.  14
After his discharge, he worked a series of three jobs as a logistics or property
clerk from October 2004 to September 2007. He then worked as a warehouse
supervisor from September 2007 to May 2008. His past employment included working
in Iraq during 2005–2008. 
He has worked in his current position as an asset manager since May 2008. For
that employment, Applicant completed a security-clearance application in May 2008.15
In doing so, he was required to provide full, frank, and truthful answers in response to
questions about his background. Applicant answered the following questions in the
negative without explanation: 
• Question 19 about Applicant’s military record: Have you ever received other than
an honorable discharge from the military?
 Exhibit 6. 16
 Exhibit 6, page 3 of 8. 17
 Exhibit 6, pages 4 and 5 of 8. 18
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to19
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
5
• Question 23d about Applicant’s police record: Have you ever been charged with
or convicted of any alcohol- or drug-related offenses?
• Question 23e about Applicant’s police record: In the last seven years, have you
been subject to court-martial or other disciplinary proceedings under the UCMJ?
• Question 25 about Applicant’s use of alcohol: In the last seven years, has your
use of alcohol resulted in any alcohol-related treatment or counseling?
The Agency issued written interrogatories to Applicant, to which he responded in
January 2009.  Concerning why he did not list his alcohol-related arrest and his16
discharge due to misconduct on his security-clearance application, Applicant explained
that he did not pay attention to the questions.  Asked about his use of alcohol and any17
alcohol-related treatment or counseling, Applicant reported that he was no longer
drinking alcohol and that he received treatment or counseling at a military facility.18
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations when he answered the SOR, to include
the falsification allegations, without explanation. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As19
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,20
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An21
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 22
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.26
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 27
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).28
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.29
6
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  22
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting23
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An24
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate25
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme26
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.27
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.28
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the29
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and30
mitigating conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 15. 31
7
Analysis
Starting with the falsification allegations, personal conduct under Guideline E30
includes issues of false statements and credible adverse information that may not be
enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall concern is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  31
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issues here are the truthfulness of Applicant’s answers to four questions on
his May 2008 security-clearance application. As discussed below, two are resolved in
Applicant’s favor and two are resolved against him.
The falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a concerns Question 19. It alleges
Applicant deliberately failed to list that he had been discharged from the military under
other than honorable conditions because he failed to disclose his general discharge.
This allegation is unproven, because the record contains no evidence to establish
Applicant was discharged “under other than honorable conditions.” The record,
Applicant’s DD Form 214 in particular, shows he was discharged under honorable
conditions, typically called a general discharge, as directed by the commander.
Accordingly, this allegation is decided for Applicant.
The falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b concerns Question 23d. It alleges
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose an alcohol-related charge or conviction based on
the March 2003 drinking-and-driving incident, which was the basis for the April 2003
Article 15. This allegation is unproven, because the record contains no evidence
showing that Applicant was charged with or convicted of an alcohol-related offense. At
best, the record shows Applicant was involved in the March 2003 drinking-and-driving
incident, was probably cited or arrested or both by the military police for driving while
impaired, and received nonjudicial punishment for violation of a regulation for underage
drinking. Applicant was not charged with or convicted of an alcohol-related offense
because, by definition and design, an Article 15 proceeding is not a judicial process and
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 16(a). 32
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and33
mitigating conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 30. 34
8
does not constitute a charge or conviction under military law. Accordingly, this allegation
is decided for Applicant. 
The falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c concerns Question 23e. It alleges
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his record of nonjudicial punishment. Because
this case is decided on the written record, I am unable to assess Applicant’s credibility
and determine if he omitted his record of four Article 15 proceedings because he
genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question,
genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported, or, as he contends, did
not pay attention to the questions. As a former soldier and clearance holder, Applicant
had to know that his record of nonjudicial punishment and discharge for misconduct
might prevent him from obtaining a clearance. Given these circumstances, the record
supports this falsification allegation.
The falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.d concerns Question 25. It alleges
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his alcohol-related treatment. The allegation
appears to be based upon Applicant’s disclosure of his alcohol-related treatment or
counseling when he responded to the Agency’s interrogatories. As a former soldier and
clearance holder, Applicant had to know that this type of negative information might
prevent him from obtaining a clearance. Given these circumstances, coupled with his
omission of his record of nonjudicial punishment, the record supports this falsification
allegation. 
Taken together, the two established falsifications support application of the
relevant disqualifying condition that addresses the deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from a security questionnaire.  I reviewed all the potential32
mitigating conditions under the guideline and conclude none apply. Making false or
misleading statements to the federal government during the security-clearance process
is serious misconduct. It is not easily explained away, excused, or mitigated.
Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
   
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  an applicant’s record of criminal33
conduct raises obvious security concerns. The overall concern is:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.34
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). 35
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).36
 Decided for Applicant because it alleges he was counseled for receiving a traffic ticket, and the record does37
not prove that the traffic offense was criminal conduct. For example, the SOR did not allege, and the record
did not establish, that Applicant’s traffic offense was a violation of a punitive regulation issued by the Army.
 Decided for Applicant because he did not receive nonjudicial punishment as alleged.  38
9
Applicant received nonjudicial punishment for multiple offenses on four
occasions—twice while deployed to a combat zone—which by itself is sufficient to raise
security concerns. Added to that, however, is Applicant’s falsification of his security-
clearance application, which was also alleged under Guideline J in SOR ¶ 1.h as a
violation of federal law (18 U.S.C. § 1001) for making a false statement within the
jurisdiction of a federal agency; this is a felony offense. His record of nonjudicial
punishment for UCMJ violations, combined with a more recent violation of federal law
by falsifying his security-clearance application, justify application of two disqualifying
conditions  under Guideline J.   35
I reviewed all the potential mitigating conditions under the guideline and conclude
none apply. Although the nonjudicial punishment took place during 2003–2004, which
ended about five years ago, it is too soon to tell if Applicant has reformed his ways. This
conclusion is justified based on his recent criminal conduct by deliberately failing to
disclose relevant facts about his background when he completed the May 2008
security-clearance application. This is both recent and serious criminal conduct.
Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against Applicant. 
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s conduct
create doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He did not present
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. In reaching
this conclusion, I considered the nine-factor whole-person concept  and Applicant’s36
favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant37
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant38
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant
 Decided for Applicant because he received nonjudicial punishment once in June 2004, not twice as alleged.39
10
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant39
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
