1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-09619
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense
industry. The record shows Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties as
shown by a defaulted student loan with an approximate balance of $77,237. Applicant
has not paid, settled, or otherwise resolved this debt, and he does not have a realistic
plan in place to do so. In addition, he might have other delinquent student loan debt.
These circumstances create doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
The record contains insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security
concerns. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibit 1. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on January 26, 2009. The SOR is similar to a complaint as it detailed the
factual basis for the action under Guideline F for financial considerations. Also, the SOR
recommended submitting the case to an administrative judge for a determination
whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion, and he requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me August 5, 2009. The hearing took place September 23,
2009. The record was left open until October 7, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit
documentary evidence as he submitted none at the hearing. Applicant made a timely
submission, which consists of a one-page handwritten letter. It is marked and admitted,
without objections, as Applicant’s Exhibit A. The transcript (Tr.) was received October 1,
2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked as a
part-time mail clerk, working about 20 hours per week, since April 2008. His duties as a
mail clerk may require him to handle and safeguard classified information. His full-time
job is as a stocker or sales associate for a large, well-known retail store. He has held
that job since 2002. It appears that this is Applicant’s initial application for an industrial
security clearance.  2
Applicant’s educational background includes completing high school. He also
attended two or three different colleges, but he did not complete the requirements for a
degree. His employment history includes less than one year of service in the U.S. Air
Force. He enlisted in 1982, and he received an entry-level separation in 1983.  He3
married for the first time in 2005, and he has no children. His wife is not employed
outside the home.  
 Exhibits 2 and 3. 4
 Tr. 74–76. 5
 Exhibit A. 6
 Tr. 81. 7
 Tr. 77–78. 8
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a9
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties as shown by
delinquent accounts in credit reports from 2008 and 2009.  The SOR alleged two4
delinquent accounts. The first is a medical debt for $1,123 that is now in collection.
Applicant believes this debt stems from medical treatment he received for a work-
related injury at the store in 2008. 
The second debt is a defaulted student loan for $77,237. The credit reports
indicate that a claim has been filed against the guarantor of the loan. The defaulted
student loan stems from money Applicant obtained to attend a school of graphic art and
cartooning in about 1990–1991. In addition, Applicant believes he might owe another
$80,000 in student loan debt for another college (institute of art) he attended.  That debt5
is not reflected in the credit reports or otherwise established by the documentary
evidence; also, it is not alleged in the SOR. 
Applicant has not presented any documentary proof of payment, settlement, or
otherwise resolving the debts. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant stated that he
contacted the creditors, but the proposed terms of monthly payments are more than he
can afford.6
Applicant and his wife budget their money on a week-to-week basis, and he
describes their overall financial situation as living paycheck-to-paycheck.  Applicant is7
willing to pay these debts, but he agrees he is unable to do so.8
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As9
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
 484 U.S. at 531.10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 17
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).18
4
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,10
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An11
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  12
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting13
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An14
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate15
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme16
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.17
The Agency’s appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.19
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating20
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  21
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  22
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 23
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 24
5
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the19
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant20
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  21
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
The record here shows Applicant has a history of financial difficulties dating back
several years. His well-established history of financial difficulties raises concerns
because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not22
meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are more23
than sufficient to establish the two disqualifying conditions, and they suggest financial
irresponsibility as well.
Under ¶ 20 of Guideline F, there are certain conditions that may mitigate security
concerns:  24
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
6
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none, either individually
or in combination, are sufficient to mitigate and overcome the security concerns
stemming from the defaulted student loan with a balance of more than $75,000. With
that said, however, I attach no security significance to the single medical debt for $1,123
that is now in collection. Experience in the ways of the world suggests that medical debt
rarely indicates if the debtor is a high risk because (1) many people are uninsured or
underinsured, (2) medical-debt collection has become big business with the buying and
selling of debt resulting in more of it appearing in credit reports, and (3) confusion often
abounds in medical billing even when a consumer is fully covered by insurance. For
these reasons, the single medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is decided for Applicant. 
Applicant does receive some credit in mitigation under the whole-person concept.
It is obvious that Applicant is a hard worker who would be willing to pay his just debts if
he had the means to do so. He has held down two jobs, working approximately 60
hours per week, since April 2008. That is no small feat and Applicant is credited
accordingly. In addition, Applicant was respectful and serious throughout the hearing,
and that attitude will serve him well as he endeavors to repay his debts. 
  
But that credit is not enough to overcome the security concerns stemming from
the defaulted student loan. Delinquent student loans, much like delinquent state and
federal income taxes and delinquent child-support payments, are viewed with particular
disfavor and take on added security significance in light of the nature of the obligation.
Further, what is missing here is a plan of action to pay, settle, or otherwise resolve the
defaulted student loan. Without a realistic plan and some measurable progress, it is too
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).25
7
early to tell if he will resolve this situation favorably. Looking forward, the likelihood of
additional financial problems cannot be ruled out as the situation is not under control.     
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s defaulted
student loan create doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He did
not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns.
In reaching this conclusion, I considered the nine-factor whole-person concept  and25
Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
