                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-00434 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct.) 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 6, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 13, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to Applicant, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 29, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 4, 2009, DOHA 
received his response. On July 14, 2009, Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed, and I received the case assignment on July 16, 2009. On July 28, 2009, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for August 25, 2009. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
received without objection. I held the record open until September 11, 2009, to afford 
the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted 
AE B through E, which were received without objection. On September 1, 2009, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Applicant testified 
at his hearing and I found his testimony credible. After a complete and thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old technical manager who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2006. GE 1, Tr. 38. He supervises nine developers and 
describes himself as the “senior architect.” Tr. 63-64. Applicant seeks a security 
clearance as a first-time applicant to enhance his position within his company. Tr. 39. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1988. Following high school, he 
pursued his education and graduated from college in May 1994 with a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Natural Resource Management. He continued his studies as a 
graduate student until August 1997, and completed all of his course work for a Master’s 
Degree in Geographic Information Systems, but did not complete or defend his thesis. 
GE 1, Tr. 35-37. Applicant married in September 1997, and has a nine-year-old 
daughter and a five-year-old son. GE 1, Tr. 38-39. 
 
Applicant has never been charged with any felony, firearms, or explosives 
offenses. He has not been charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type, non-traffic-
related offenses. He has not had any debts delinquent over 180 days, bankruptcy 
petitions, unpaid judgments, or unpaid liens. Apart from his self-disclosure of drug and 
alcohol abuse discussed infra, the case file contains no derogatory information about 
the Applicant. GE 1 – GE 3. 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Personal Conduct (falsification concerns)2 
 
 The security concerns alleged in the SOR center on Applicant’s purported 
submission of false information regarding his past drug use, or alternatively stated, his 
underreported past drug use. In response to Section 24 on his April 2007 e-QIP, 
Applicant stated he had used cocaine on two occasions in May 2005. The SOR alleged 
that he deliberately failed to disclose on that same e-QIP that he had used cocaine with 
varying frequency between 2000 and 2005, and illegally used Xanax between 2001 and 
2003, by using the medication in dosages exceeding levels prescribed by his physician. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.)  
 
 Additionally, when Application was interviewed by a Special Agent of the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) in July 2007, he is purported to have deliberately 
falsified material facts to the Special Agent when he stated that he had used cocaine on 
two occasions in May 2005. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
 During his OPM interview in July 2007, he revealed his use of Xanax, which was 
not included in his April 2007 e-QIP. In his August 2008 Interrogatories, he provided a 
more comprehensive answer regarding past cocaine use, which included varying use of 
cocaine from 2000 and 2005. GE 3, Tr. 29-32. This information conflicted with his e-QIP 
response and with what he is reported to have told the OPM Special Agent during his 
July 2007 interview. 
 
 Regarding past cocaine use, Applicant stated in his February 2009 
Interrogatories: 
 
I checked my copy of the original questionnaire. I did answer yes to 24A, 
however I overlooked the space below for details. Smaller print & I 
missed. Accidental & not intentional. GE 3.  
 
During his hearing testimony, he reiterated his Interrogatory response and added: 
 
In regard to the Xanax, you know, this was so long ago that I don’t 
remember, but, I mean, the way that I read this, I either just missed it, not 
intentionally, or I read this differently looking at illicit, illegal drugs. The 
Xanax I had was a prescribed prescription, and I’m not about to say that I 
didn’t abuse it because I did, and I was addicted to it. But I think at the 
time I probably read this as a legal use, controlled substances, and I 
probably – I either missed it or I considered the Xanax as it was a 
 
2 Identified security concerns were limited Applicant’s alleged falsifications pertaining to past drug 
use. Applicant successfully completed an intensive outpatient drug and alcohol outpatient treatment 
program from May 31, 2005 to July 20, 2005, and his aftercare continued to November 2005. His doctor 
recommended that Applicant’s outpatient treatment include attending a 12-step Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) program. Applicant did enroll in AA and regularly attends AA meetings. GE 3, AE E, Tr. 45-50. The 
record contains no evidence of any drug use after 2005. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
prescription I had from a doctor. I might have not put it on there because 
of that. Tr. 32. 
 
During his hearing testimony, he reiterated his Interrogatory response: 
 
In regard to the, the cocaine use, like I said, I’ve tried to be honest with 
this whole process. And like I said, the notes I have, you know, I put that 
on here. Obviously I, to me at least, I read that incorrectly, or I didn’t put it 
on there. And I do have on my notes, [OPM Agent] and I did discuss more 
than just the two times that I did that.3 So it’s possible that I just misread it. 
But, again, I didn’t intentionally do anything. 
 
For me, one thing at looking at all these documents, you know, I’m not 
proud of my past, and, you know, when I look at these documents and 
stuff I don’t really see anything I would have to gain by saying I didn’t do 
an illegal drug this many times versus I did it this many times, to me at 
least. I mean, I’ve been forthcoming about it, and if I’ve done it twice, I 
don’t, it’s pretty much as bad as doing it, you know, ten times, in my mind, 
maybe not from the Government’s point of view. 
 
By my point is that, you know, I was told from the get go from several 
people, you know, “Put everything on there you did, and you’ll likely get 
your clearance on there, or be dishonest about something, you will not get 
it.” And I would have been honest anyway, but through this whole process 
I put everything on there that I could think of. 
 
The last thing I wanted to say in regard to that is, you know, if the 
Government asked me to get a check from the bank or something like 
that, that I had a document, I could do that, but I don’t have detailed 
records of my drug use, you know. So I tried to piece this together and, 
you know, recollect it to the best of my abilities. And like I said, as far as 
[OPM Agent] goes, I did have that [with] her and I discussed that, and I 
think I might have just read or misinterpreted it in the original application. 
Tr. 33-34. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a reference letter from his supervisor. The supervisor stated 
that she has known the Applicant since his initial employment with their company in 
2006. She has found Applicant to be “diligent, trustworthy, and honest in all his 
professional and personal dealings with employees, clients and subcontractors.” AE D. 
 
3 During Applicant’s testimony, he produced his handwritten notes from his July 2007 OPM 
interview, which corroborated his version of past cocaine use. AE A, Tr. 50-58. The OPM Special Agent’s 
testimony revealed that she did not take a signed, sworn statement from Applicant, but rather prepared a 
summary of her interview with Applicant. She added that she believed the Applicant was truthful during 
his interview. Tr. 15-27.   
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
His company’s promotion letter announcing his current position of technical manager 
lauded his technical leadership in high profile projects. Applicant also submitted a 
performance evaluation from his previous employer that reflected above average 
performance. AE B. 
 
Lastly, Applicant’s AA sponsor submitted a letter stating that Applicant has been 
“clean and sober” and an active member of AA for over four years. He further stated 
that Applicant has rebuilt his family, personal, and professional life and that Applicant is 
an honest and upstanding member of his community. AE E. 
 
Applicant testified that he spends most of his spare time with his children, and 
enjoys playing golf. Tr. 55-56. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false security 
clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
In April 2007, Applicant submitted an e-QIP that asked questions about past drug 
use. As noted supra, Applicant provided incorrect or incomplete answers regarding his 
past misuse of prescription drugs and cocaine use. In a July 2007 OPM interview, he 
was cited for failing to disclose the full extent of his past cocaine use. During that 
interview, he disclosed his past misuse of prescription drugs. In his August 2008 
response to Interrogatories, he expanded on his past cocaine use. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) both apply because of the conflicting information he provided regarding the full 
extent of his past drug use. Further review is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  Applicant credibly stated when he completed his e-QIP his failure to list the full 
extent of past cocaine use and his misuse of prescription drugs was unintentional. He 
stated when interviewed by the OPM investigator, it was his recollection that he did 
discuss his more comprehensive cocaine use. His interview notes corroborate his 
recollection. It was also during this interview, he freely revealed his past misuse of 
prescription drugs. He explained that he did not keep records of past drug use and tried 
to answer the questions as truthfully and accurately as possible at the time. When he 
completed his Interrogatories in August 2008 and upon further reflection, he amended 
his previous response regarding past cocaine use. 
 
He was candid and forthright at his hearing about his past drug use. I conclude 
Applicant’s alleged falsifications were not intentional. Although he provided incomplete 
information in his April 2007 e-QIP, AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies. The falsification allegations 
are not substantiated. I am satisfied he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to 
disclose his past drug use on his e-QIP or during his OPM interview with intent to 
deceive.4 I find “For Applicant” in the Findings section of this decision with respect to 
SOR ¶ 1.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
4The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
    
Applicant’s conflicting versions of past drug use placed his credibility into 
question warranting further inquiry. The government relies on each applicant to 
thoroughly and accurately respond to questions asked. Information applicants provide 
form the basis to grant or deny security clearances. Applicant’s failure to provide 
accurate and complete information required further costly and time consuming inquiries 
that could have been avoided. Fortunately for Applicant, his lack of due diligence was 
not imputed to be intentional or deliberate. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is sufficient to warrant 
granting Applicant’s security clearance. There is no evidence of any security 
violation(s). Applicant has achieved some important educational, employment, and 
personal milestones, demonstrating his self-discipline, responsibility and dedication. He 
is a college graduate, who completed his course work for his master’s degree. He was 
recently promoted by his employer and is responsible for nine subordinates. Applicant is 
well regarded by his employer. He has overcome alcohol addiction and drug abuse, and 
regularly attends AA meetings. Applicant is a dedicated and responsible husband and 
father of two young children. Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and 
trustworthiness through his service to the Department of Defense as an employee of a 
defense contractor.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
PARAGRAPH 2, GUIDELINE E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
