                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-09097
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On June 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 26, 2009, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on July 21, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on August
19, 2009.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
2
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the government's case
consisted of nine exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and three
exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 27, 2009.  Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access classified
information is denied.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline G, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested on four different
occasions for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI): (a) in December 2004, for
which he was fined $576 and ordered to serve 48 hours of community service; (b) in
October 2004, for which he was fined $577 and ordered to serve 48 hours of community
service; (c) in September 1993, for which he was fined $910, and ordered to serve 48
hours of community service; and (d) in October 1983, for which he was fined an
unidentified amount.
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) petitioned for Chapter 7
bankruptcy protection in December 2006 (discharged in April 2007), (b) accumulated
$20,000 in gambling debts over a five-year period; and (c) continues to gamble. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied most of the alcohol-related
allegations covered by Guideline G; he admitted only the allegations in subparagraph
1.d. He admitted to petitioning for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2006 and
continuing to gamble. He denied losing $20,000 in gambling debts over a five-year
period.  Applicant provided no explanations for his answers.         
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is 53-year old material coordinator for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant had a short marriage: He married in October 1987 and divorced his wife
in June 1989.  He has no children.  He has no military experience and no identified
schooling beyond high school (see ex. 1).
Applicant was introduced to alcohol at the age of 16 (Tr. 90).  He did not like it and
did not resume drinking until he was 21 years of age (Tr. 90).  Applicant continued to
drink at a light to moderate rate between 1975 and 1989 (see exs. 2 and 8). He attended
about 20 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings on the orders of the court that sentenced
him following his 1983 DUI conviction, but none thereafter (Tr. 91).  
Between 1989 and 1994, he increased his drinking considerably: to the point of
intoxication three to four times a year (Tr. 90).  During this period, he often drank to
mitigate the effects of his depression problem. (Tr. 92, 102).  He was counseled an
treated by a psychiatrist for a minor depression problem from October 1995 to November
3
2008 (see ex. 2). After his medical provider advised him not to continue drinking in
conjunction with the anti-depressant medication (Prozac) he was taking for his
diagnosed Dysthymic Disorder (Tr. 65, 93), he reduced his alcohol consumption (Tr. 94).
For the ensuing seven years (between 1993 and 2000), he drank very little, and even
abstained completely for a brief period between 1995 and 1997 (Tr. 116).
 After his mother passed away in 1997, though, he resumed his drinking,
sometimes with his brother in social settings (Tr. 94, 117).  Applicant realizes he should
not be drinking with his brother, but still spends time with him. Just two weeks ago at
their father’s home, he consumed two beers in his brother’s presence (Tr. 94, 117-18).
Although Applicant does not consume alcohol as frequently as he used to, he continues
to drink occasionally and shows no disposition for abstaining in the future (Tr. 94-95).
Typically, when he drinks, he consumes only beer and limits his intake to a few beers
(Tr. 94-95).  
Once he returned to drinking in 2000, his alcohol consumption increased
dramatically. Sometimes he drank to intoxication.  Once a month, sometimes bi-monthly,
he drove to a large gambling metropolis south of his place of residence to spend
weekends seeing exhibits, attending concerts, and gambling casinos. On these
occasions, he typically consumed large amounts of alcohol: usually seven to eight beers
over a five-hour period. Applicant maintained this travel practice for over four years,
before cutting back to the occasional drinking he currently practices. 
Between October 1983 and December 2004, Applicant was involved in four
alcohol-related incidents.  He was arrested and fined for all four of his alcohol-related
arrests: in October 1983, in September 1993, in October 2004, and in December 2004
(see exs. 2 through 8; Tr. 63.  In each instance (save for his 1983 conviction), he was
fined and court-ordered to serve 48 hours of community service (see exs. 2 and 8). His
arrest records covering his 1993 DUI note that Applicant recorded a .199 per cent blood
alcohol consumption rate after telling the arresting officer he had consumed two to three
beers (see exs. 4 and 5).  Besides the four incidents for which he was arrested and
convicted, he is certain there were other occasions when he consumed alcohol before he
drove his vehicle (Tr. 89).
Over a 10-year period between 1995 and 2006, Applicant often took gambling
vacations to a large gaming metropolis in his state (Tr. 97-98).  On these trips, usually
once a month, he typically attended exhibits, concerts, and gambling casinos, and often
consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication (Tr. 98-99). When attending outdoor
concerts, he typically consumed seven to eight beers over a five to six hour period ex. 2;
(Tr. 99-100).
Applicant entered guilty pleas in connection with the DUI charges filed in
connection with both his October and December 2004 arrests.  The court consolidated
the cases and assigned a single case number (see exs. 2 and 3).  When Applicant
appeared on both cases in August 2006, the court accepted his guilty pleas. In its
sentencing order, the court required Applicant to complete an online alcohol-related
4
driving course (Tr. 66).  The court also required him to obtain an evaluation from a local
alcohol counselor (Tr. 67, 87, 104-09, 112).  He is not familiar with her credentials, but
believes she was a licensed substance abuse counselor (see ex. 2; Tr. 105).  While she
did not indicate he had an alcohol problem, she did not share any report with him (Tr.
104-15).  She advised him to consult his physician about combining his prescribed
Prozac medications with alcohol.  Applicant complied with her instructions (Tr. 67, 96-
97).  
Following Applicant’s two convictions resulting from his 2004 DUI arrests, the
court directed Applicant to seek an alcohol-related evaluation.  By all accounts, Applicant
complied with the terms of the sentences imposed on him in connection with each of his
convictions (Tr. 86).  Since his last DUI offense in 2004, Applicant has not been involved
in any other alcohol-related incident. 
Applicant has alcohol issues within his family. His brother is an alcoholic (Tr. 64).
Consequently, when Applicant visits his brother, he seldom longer consumes alcohol in
his presence (see ex. 2; Tr. 64).  Besides his brother, Applicant had a grandfather who
was an alcoholic before he passed away (Tr. 64).  He also had a close friend who
believed to be an alcoholic.  Applicant finds it hard to deal with either of them, and tries
to avoid them as much as possible (Tr.  118-19).
Since his last DUI conviction, Applicant continues to consume alcohol, but less
frequently.  After completing his 20 court-directed Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings
in 1983, he ceased attending AA events altogether, and has never resumed his AA
participation. 
At home, Applicant has little social life and considers himself an infrequent
drinker.  He has no family support system, though, and no AA or other support network
to help him maintain his sobriety. The court-referred counselor who evaluated him
following his 2004 DUI convictions never shared her report with him or provided him a
copy of the same (Tr. 104-07).  And Applicant has never referred himself for diagnosis by
a certified physician or licensed substance abuse counselor (Tr. 102).  So, at this time, it
is still unclear whether (a) Applicant has any alcohol-related disorder (inclusive of
dependence or abuse) or (b) if he does, it is medically advisable for him to continue to
consume alcohol in the face of his alcohol drinking and family history.   
Applicant’s finances
Before filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in December 2006 (see ex. 2),
Applicant maintained reasonably good credit (Tr. 75).  Periodically, he traveled south to a
large metropolis to gamble, a favorite pastime of Applicant’s. He characterized his
gambling as social gambling that he did not think (at the time) involved the use of income
sources needed to pay his domestic bills (Tr. 77). He now realizes that “he must have
gambled with money that went to pay bills,” based on his understanding of the contents
of his Chapter 7 bankruptcy schedules (Tr. 77). 
5
Between 2001 and 2006, he estimates he spent about $20,000 on his gambling
vacations before filing for bankruptcy in late 2006 (Tr. 71-74).  Black jack was his
principal game of choice, and he sometimes lost as much as $500 in an evening of
gambling (Tr. 77, 97). He typically used his credit cards to finance his gambling
endeavors (ex. 2). 
Prior to filing for Chapter 7 relief, Applicant talked to several of his credit card
creditors about lowering his debt payments, but to no avail (Tr.68).  When he was late on
one of his credit card payments, the creditor raised the interest rate on his account to 30
per cent (Tr. 68-69).  He could not make the increased payments with the interest rate
changes and elected to file for bankruptcy (see ex. 2; Tr. 69).  Besides talking to debt
consolidation companies and his credit card creditors, Applicant also completed the
court’s required financial counseling (Tr. 68).  
In his 2007 bankruptcy petition, Applicant scheduled $63,736 in unscheduled
claims (mostly credit card accounts) and $6,200 worth of secured claims (see ex. 2; Tr.
73).  His listed assets included a secured mobile home worth $5,000 and personal
property valued at $33,678 (see ex.2). Applicant claimed all of this property to be exempt
from creditor claims (see ex. 2).  
Applicant received his bankruptcy discharge in April 2007.  By all accounts, his
claimed exemptions were honored, and nothing was left of his estate for distribution to
his creditors.  As such, Applicant’s bankruptcy is classified as an essentially no-asset
case.
Since his bankruptcy discharge, Applicant has been able to maintain all of his
accounts in a current state (see exs. C through E; Tr. 70-72).  His net monthly income is
approximately $2,000 a month (see ex. 2; Tr. 78-79).  He monthly expenses cover his
rent ($300), food ($400 to $500), car insurance ($105), gas for his vehicle ($50), utilities
($400 plus), and recreation ($80).  He has no written budget but tries to keep track of his
expenditures (Tr. 80).  Applicant has few assets: a vehicle, about $600 in his checking
account, and some $3,000 stuffed under his bed for emergencies (Tr. 81).  His 401(k)
retirement plan has about a $12,000 balance at the present time (Tr. 77-78, 82-83).  He
owns a 2003 vehicle that is paid off (see ex. B).  While he continues to gamble some in
his home town, he no longer takes weekend gambling trips and gambles only with extra
dollars not needed to pay his bills (Tr. 77). Applicant is corroborated by his credit reports,
which show all of his accounts to be in current status (see exs. C through E).
Endorsements
Applicant’s supervisor (who is also the firm’s company manager) has known
Applicant for 20 years (Tr. 48-49).  This supervisor knows Applicant professionally and
socially, sees him two to three times a week, and characterizes him as loyal,
responsible, and trustworthy (Tr. 51-53).  He credits Applicant with a very strong work
ethic (Tr. 59).  Applicant’s employment credits include numerous training certificates (see
ex. F).
6
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
See AG ¶ 21.
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
7
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,
531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a highly regarded employee of a defense contractor with a history of
recurrent alcohol-related arrests (four in all over a 20-year period spanning 1983 and
2004) and admitted other instances of abusive alcohol consumption over the same
period. Applicant’s exhibited alcohol abuse raises security concerns covered by
8
Guideline G of the Adjudicative Guidelines.  Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts
associated with credit card accounts (some used to finance his gambling endeavors)
contributed to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2007. Applicant’s finances raise security
concerns, too, under Guideline F.    
Applicant’s alcohol issues
Applicant’s four alcohol-related arrests covered in the SOR raise major concerns
over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.  On the strength of the evidence presented, two
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Adjudication Guidelines for alcohol consumption (AG
¶ 21) may be applied: 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent,” and ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to
the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
Despite the recurrent pattern of his alcohol-related arrests (four over a 20-year
period), Applicant does not believe he is alcoholic and assures he has reduced his
drinking to occasional consumption since his last DUI conviction in 2004.  He has alcohol
addiction in his family, however, and a recurrent history of alcohol-related incidents.  He
also reports some history of depression issues requiring medications. Advised by his
treating mental health provider that these medications could, when used concurrently
with alcohol, exacerbate his condition, he elected to cease taking his medications
altogether. Family history, recurrent alcohol-related convictions, and continued drinking
despite knowledge of a recurrent psychological problem are cited indicators of a
substance-dependence problem. See Diagnostic Statistical Manual-IV (4  ed) (DSM-IV). th
Whether Applicant has an alcohol disorder covered by the DSM-IV cannot be
firmly established without a documented professional evaluation by a credentialed
physician or licensed substance abuse counselor. In the absence of an updated
professional evaluation, Applicant’s status and needs cannot be reasonably determined.
From what is known from the proofs, he has never sought an evaluation from a
credentialed physician or licensed substance abuse counselor, and has not attended any
meetings with AA or other recognized support system since the 1980s.
Applicant’s failure to provide any professional evaluations or documented  support
of his reduced drinking during the past four plus years are important considerations in
determining what weight to assign to Applicant’s rehabilitation claims.  See ISCR Case
02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006); ISCR Case 01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004). 
Still troubling and of ongoing security concern is Applicant’s history of recurrent
relapses following periods of light to moderate alcohol consumption, and his lack of any
extended period of sustained abstinence.  While Applicant provides assurances of his
sincere commitment this time to maintain his current track of occasional drinking, he
9
provides no professional evaluations on which to assess the adequacy of his reduced
alcohol consumption in managing his sobriety.
With a family history of alcohol dependence, a recurrent pattern of alcohol-related
incidents over a 20-year period, and a medical condition that could be exacerbated by
any concurrent use of alcohol with his prescribed medications, it is still too soon to make
safe predictions that Applicant is at no foreseeable risk to a recurrent alcohol-related
incident or episode.  Although he has been able to avoid any more alcohol-related
arrests since his last arrest and conviction in 2004, he continues to drink without a clean
bill of health from a physician or licensed substance abuse provider. Under these special
circumstances, MC ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the behavior was so
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” has limited application. 
Without proof of sustained abstinence, current participation in AA or other
credible support program, and/or a positive alcohol evaluation, none of the other
potentially available mitigating conditions under the alcohol guideline are available to
Applicant.  Passage of time without a recurrent incident, while important, is not enough to
warrant application of any of the other mitigating conditions without any demonstrated
satisfaction of the requirements imposed by these other mitigating conditions. 
Faced with similar recurrent alcohol-related arrests over a considerable period of
time, and the absence of any sustained abstinence, the Appeal Board has expressed
reluctance to make safe, predictive judgments about an applicant’s ability to avoid
abusive incidents in the future without strong probative evidence of sustained recovery,
aided by positive professional reinforcements.  See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App. Bd.
Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007); ISCR Case No. 05-
16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007).
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, his strong work
record, the applicable guidelines and a whole person assessment of his most recent
alcohol moderation efforts, conclusions warrant that his overall efforts, while
encouraging, do not reflect sufficient  evidence of sustained commitment to a program
that provides optimum protections against recurrent alcohol abuse.  In the past, he has
enjoyed considerable periods of abuse avoidance, only to return to abusive drinking that
involved alcohol-related incidents away from work. Because of this recurrent abuse
problem, his earlier incidents cannot be considered isolated and unrelated to a pattern of
abuse, despite their comparative age when considered separately.
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant fails to make a convincing showing
that he has the resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent problems with
judgment lapses related to alcohol.  Applicant’s mitigation efforts are simply not enough
at this time to warrant safe predictions that he is no longer at risk to judgment impairment
10
associated with alcohol abuse. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by the alcohol guideline of the SOR. 
Applicant’s financial issues
Applicant’s pleading admissions of his Chapter 7 bankruptcy and continued
involvement in gambling activities (sometimes referred to as judicial admissions) negate
the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006).
Moreover, Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy schedules, which include defaulted credit
card accounts covering some $20,000 in pre-bankruptcy gambling debts, are fully
documented in his latest credit reports and provide ample independent proof of his pre-
bankruptcy debts.  Applicant’s accumulation of gambling-related debts and their inclusion
in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,”
DC ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and DC ¶ 19(f), “financial
problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling problems, or other issues
of security concern.”
With his limited repayment history and lengthy practice of using his monthly
income to fund his gambling endeavors instead of applying his marginal income sources
to discharge his consumer bills that came due, Applicant’s finances have not been very
stable in recent years. While he has made some noticeable improvements in keeping his
accounts current since receiving his Chapter 7 discharge in April 2007, his past gambling
abuses do create some recurrence concerns.  
Applicant’s progress to date in regaining control of his finances is encouraging.
His efforts reflect positively on the lessons he has learned from his past mistakes in
allocating his income sources.  His furnished estimates of his ability to continue to pay
his bills in a timely way and avoid any return to gambling except with excess funds are
credible, significant, and encouraging.  Based on his evidentiary showing, Applicant’s
proofs are sufficient to establish some extenuating circumstances associated with his
debt accumulations (i.e., unanticipated major increases in interest rates on carried
balances by some of his credit card issuers).  Of limited application is MC  ¶ 20(b) of the
financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibly.”  Most of his accrued debts were controllable, though, and could likely
have been avoided without the compounding burdens of his  gambling debts. 
Applicant’s current payment practices with his creditors since his 2007 bankruptcy
discharge entitle him to some mitigation credit under MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Although his
bankruptcy was a no-asset case, he did initiate some prior efforts to work with his
creditors before ultimately settling on a bankruptcy strategy to resolve his accrued debts.
His bankruptcy petition and discharge cost him both time and money expended on
11
attorneys to process his bankruptcy petition to completion. His efforts, although very
limited, are encouraging. They are not enough, though, at this time to warrant full
application of any of the mitigating conditions covered in the financial guideline.  
To be sure, Applicant’s gambling was significant and extended over a five-year
period between 2001 and 2006.  His gambling expenditures over this time frame (around
$20,000 by Applicant’s estimations) were considerable and a principal contributor to his
2006 bankruptcy petition.  Moreover, even if some of Applicant’s debt delinquencies did
arise due to circumstances outside of his control, he could have been reasonably
expected to have exerted more responsible efforts in limiting his gambling activities that
left him with no viable options to petitioning for bankruptcy. 
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s duties
and access to classified information necessarily impose important duties of trust and
candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those typically imposed
on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of government
business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in
financial cases.  Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his
debts when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the
applicant’s demonstrated trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
While no direct causal links were established in the record between Applicant’s
drinking and gambling abuses, they do bear some relationship. His gambling trips
typically involved weekend excursions that included drinking and gambling. His gambling
debts accrued over a contemporaneous period that included his last two DUI incidents.
Recurrent alcohol risks that remain with Applicant could pose some potential for
Applicant’s resumption of the gambling trips that caused him financial problems before
2007. The potential overlap was never firmly stitched together, though, and Applicant
can credibly claim he is current with all of his bills since his bankruptcy discharge and in
no danger of losing control of his finances.  
Whole-person assessments enable Applicant to surmount the judgment questions
raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts that were resolved by his Chapter 7
discharge in 2007.  His positive endorsement from his supervisor who he has known for
20 years, and his credible showing that he is current in his bills all support his claims that
he has a firm control of his finances and is at no risk to delinquencies in the foreseeable
future. 
12
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations (inclusive of his major gambling debts) and resulting
2007 bankruptcy, and his most recent efforts in managing his finances, Applicant’s
efforts to date are sufficient to make safe predictive judgments about his ability to
maintain control of his finances in the foreseeable future. 
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the information
available for consideration in this record enables him to establish judgment and trust
levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his accumulation of
delinquent debts.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered
by subparagraphs 2a through 2.c.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in ¶ 2(a) of the AGs.
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):       AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.d:                Against Applicant 
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras: 2a through 2.c:           For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
13
