                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-07848 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s trustworthiness concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
On May 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guidelines H and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing May 13, 2009, and did not request a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On June 17, 2009, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on July 27, 2009. DOHA issued the 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
Notice of Appearance on August 6, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
September 24, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Exhibits 
(AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on September 14, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old, single and has no children. He graduated from college 
in 2004. He has worked as a systems analyst for a federal contractor since 2005. He 
completed a public trust application (PTA) and signed it on January 17, 2008. In 
response to a question asking if he used illegal drugs in the past year, he answered 
“no.” In response to a question asking if he had been involved in the purchase, transfer, 
trafficking, or shipping of illegal drugs in the past, he answered “no.”1  
 
In May 2008, while on a camping trip with friends from high school and college, 
Applicant used marijuana one time. He did not buy the marijuana. He and his friends 
were in a secluded area in the woods. On the same night, he also used hallucinogenic 
mushrooms. He did not hallucinate. The marijuana and mushrooms belonged to one of 
the many friends who were on the trip. Applicant has not used marijuana, mushrooms, 
or any other illegal drug since May 2008. Applicant does not live with or work with any of 
the people with whom he went camping.2  
 
Applicant acknowledges he made a “stupid” mistake when he used the drugs. He 
regrets his actions. He socializes with people from work. Some of them are aware of his 
drug use. Applicant does not believe any of the friends that he socializes with use illegal 
drugs. He did not intend on using drugs when he went on the camping trip. The 
camping trip is an annual occurrence and he credibly testified that he did not use illegal 
drugs during the other years he attended, to include 2007 and 2009. He admitted he did 
not think about the fact that he had completed a PTA and was waiting for the 
determination when he used the drugs. He forgot he had completed the application and 
did not think of the impact his one-time use would have on it.3  
 
While attending college, primarily as a freshman, Applicant used marijuana less 
than ten times. After graduating from college in 2004, he may have used it one other 
time. He never purchased marijuana. He did not use any other illegal drugs during this 
1 Tr. 14-20; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. 18-20. 
 
3 Tr. 29-32, 39-47. 
3 
 
                                                          
time. He does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the future. He admitted he was 
wrong to use the drugs and is sorry for his actions.4  
 
Applicant provided character letters from his manager and a coworker. He is 
described in the letters as a dedicated worker with integrity. He is respected for his 
achievements. He is recognized for his leadership and resourcefulness. He has a 
positive attitude and is able to handle demanding challenges. He has also demonstrated 
exceptional knowledge, discipline and dedication to his employer.5 Applicant provided a 
copy of his performance appraisal which reflects he is an excellent employee.6 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 Tr. 20 29, 41.  
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 AE B. 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
25 and have especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
5 
 
Applicant used marijuana and hallucinogenic mushrooms one time in May 2008, 
after he completed his PTA, but before a determination was made. To use the illegal 
substances, he must have possessed them. I find both of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant used marijuana and mushrooms one time in May 2008, while on a 
camping trip with high school and college friends. He minimally experimented with 
marijuana when he was a freshman in college and may have used it one other time. He 
has not used any illegal drugs since May 2008. He understands he made a mistake. He 
does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the future. The camping trip is an annual 
event and he did not use drugs during the trip the year before or the year after 2008. He 
attributes his use to youthful indiscretion and a one-time occurrence. I find his behavior 
was infrequent. Applicant has matured to the point that he understands that his youthful 
indiscretions have consequences. Applicant has not used illegal drugs since May 2008, 
even after being placed in the same environment. He acknowledged his poor judgment 
and does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. I find his conduct is unlikely to 
recur. He has grown up and moved past this type of conduct. I find mitigating conditions 
(a) and (b) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. 
I have considered all of the personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
16 and especially considering the following: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
6 
 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional, or community standing. 
Applicant completed a PTA in January 2008. Pending the adjudication of his 
PTA, he used illegal drugs in May 2008. I find the above disqualifying condition applies.  
I have considered the all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 17 and especially considered:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
Applicant reported his drug use during his interview. He was honest and 
forthcoming. He acknowledged he made a stupid mistake and regrets his conduct. He 
has matured and does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the future. Some of his 
coworkers are aware of his prior drug use. I find based on these facts and the same 
rationale discussed under the drug involvement guideline, that all of the above 
mitigating conditions apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are:  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man with no 
significant drug history, who went on a camping trip with high school and college 
friends, and used marijuana and hallucinogenic mushrooms one time. He has not used 
any illegal drugs since then and acknowledges he made an irresponsible decision. He 
regrets it and does not intend on repeating it. He is a valued employee. Applicant has 
matured and it is unlikely he will repeat his mistake. Overall, the record evidence does 
not leave me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns arising under the guidelines for drug involvement and personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
