                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-09904
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 21, 2009, and requested a hearing.  The
case was assigned to me on June 23, 2009, and was scheduled for hearing on August
18, 2009.  A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At the hearing, the Government's case
consisted of three exhibits (ex.); Applicant relied on four witnesses (including himself)
2
and 12 exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 25, 2009.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access classified
information is granted.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested in September 2005
and charged with felony battery with substantial abuse of victim over 60.  He is alleged to
have pleaded guilty to the charge in October 2006, and was sentenced to between 2 to 5
years in prison, plus an additional consecutive term of 2 to 5 years due to the victim’s
age (suspended), placed on probation for five years and house arrest for one year, and
ordered to attend anger management and pay $15,000 in restitution.
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation. He provided no
explanations. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old quality assurance inspector for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant enjoyed a normal childhood while growing up in a neighboring state.  He
earned good grades in primary and secondary schools and was active in Boy Scouts
(see ex. A; Tr. 57).  He has two older sisters.
After completing his high school education, Applicant worked as a cashier for a
local company for several years. In 1984, he enlisted in the Air Force (Tr. 89). He
received technician training early in his Air Force career and served as an aircraft
technician for the first five plus years of his enlistment-1985 to 1990 (Tr. 59-60). 
In 1996, Applicant volunteered to work on a classified aircraft program at another
Air Force base facility (Tr.60). He worked on this program before transferring to an
aircraft surveillance position in another command at the same base facility (Tr. 60-61).
He describes himself as one of several non-commissioned officers (NCOs) who served
as quality assurance evaluators and liaison between the Government and the facility
contractor (Tr. 61-62).
Applicant received his first security clearance in 1984 and has held a clearance
continuously since that time (Tr. 63).  He never had an adverse incident during his 22
years of active duty in the Air Force. His credibility is excellent, and his assurances are
accepted. His consistent practice during his years of active duty was to report any
security violation he found or observed to his command (Tr.  63-64).   
3
Following his retirement from the Air Force in November 2005, Applicant came to
work for his current employer as a quality assurance inspector. His current duties include
technical dispatching of aircraft readiness inspectors (Tr. 64-65).
Applicant married in 1993.  His spouse had one young son who resided with them
after their marriage. His mother-in-law also came to live with them following their
marriage (Tr. 67).  Applicant has four children from his marriage: two sons (ages 15 and
7) and two daughters (ages 13 and 12). 
Applicant and his spouse frequently argued after their first year of marriage and
divorced in 1997 due to irreconcilable differences (Tr. 67, 90-93).  Before their divorce,
his wife obtained a temporary protective order (TPO), citing physical violence (throwing a
chair at her that she avoided). Applicant denied the charge (Tr. 92, 105), but did not
challenge her claims in court (Tr. 109-10). During the six months or so that the TPO was
enforced, Applicant was permitted to see his children (Tr. 108). This was the only
physical incident claimed by his wife during their first marriage. 
In 2001, Applicant’s ex-wife approached him about reconciling.  Applicant agreed
and moved into her house; they remarried that same year (Tr. 93).  
During their marriage, Applicant’s stepson was always hard to control, and
occasionally became disruptive. He was often in trouble in school and in the
neighborhood, and was never very close to Applicant (see ex. A). Applicant recalled
several arguments with his mother-in-law over disciplining his stepson. He described his
mother-in-law as a very bitter and angry person, who was abused in the past by her
husband (see ex. A; Tr. 106).  Between 2001 and September 2005, Applicant never
engaged in any type of abusive behavior (either physical or mental) around anyone in his
household (Tr. 94).  Nor were there any allegations of abuse that Applicant is aware of
(Tr. 94). 
September 2005 assault incident
On or about September 26, 2005, Applicant was called to school to discuss the
re-enrollment of his stepson (age 13 at the time) with school officials (Tr. 68). The
meeting with school officials did not end very well: the stepson remained expelled from
school (tr. 68-69).  When Applicant arrived home following his meeting with school
officials, he tried to tell his wife what transpired at the meeting (Tr. 69). His stepson
intervened and forcefully disputed Applicant’s account (Tr. 96). After the stepson became
increasingly contentious, Applicant told the stepson to go to his room (Tr. 96).  When the
stepson verbally refused, Applicant grabbed him by his shirt, repeated his demands, and
pushed him (albeit, not very hard) towards his room (Tr. 69, 97-99).  
At this point, Applicant’s mother-in-law took exception to Applicant’s demands of
his stepson and aggressively moved inches from his face to confront him (Tr. 69-70; 97-
99).  Instead of retreating, he grabbed her with both hands and pushed her away from
him, but not to the ground (Tr. 70, 86, 98). His mother-in-law, who suffered from
4
advanced osteoporosis (a condition known to Applicant), stumbled over an object as she
was pushed, fell backwards, and dropped to the floor, breaking her shoulder and elbow
in the fall (Tr. 70, 86-87).  The stepson then ran next door and called the police, who
arrived at the scene a short time later.  When the police arrived, they took statements
from the participants (see ex. 2; Tr.71). Upon completing their investigation at the scene,
the police arrested Applicant and escorted him to the local police station for holding (Tr.
71). After he was booked and released (September 28, 2005).  At his wife’s invitation, he
returned home to their residence (see ex. 2; Tr.71).
The following day, Applicant appeared in court to face assault charges, and was
told by the presiding judge that the charges had been dropped (Tr. 72).  He continued to
receive calls, however, from his sister-in-law threatening him with additional charges
(see ex. 2).  He was concerned enough about these calls that in November 2005 he
contacted an attorney to represent him in the matter.
Applicant’s retained attorney initially told him the assault charges were still being
pursued by prosecutors, but only as misdemeanors (ex. 2; Tr. 72). Shortly thereafter,
though, the court clerk advised Applicant by letter that prosecutors determined to pursue
the charges as a felony, once they learned of the victim’s age (Tr. 72).  When his
attorney appeared in court (sometime in November 2005), prosecutors confirmed that
the misdemeanor charges had been dropped and replaced with felony charges (see ex.
2).  
Appearing at his trial-setting hearing in February 2006, Applicant pleaded not
guilty to the felony charge and received a scheduled trial date in October 2006.  When
he appeared for trial, he changed his plea (based on the advice of his attorney) to guilty
(see ex. 2).  At a subsequently convened sentencing hearing in October 2006, the court
accepted his guilty plea, and sentenced him to 2 to 5 years of incarceration (suspended),
plus an additional term of 2 to 5 years because the victim was over 65 years of age (see
exs. 2 and 3).
At his sentencing hearing, the court suspended Applicant’s sentence and placed
him under five years of probation, and one year of house arrest with a monitoring device
to control his movements (see ex. 2; Tr. 101-02). The court also ordered Applicant to
have no contact with his mother-in-law, pay restitution in the amount of $15,000, and
complete an anger management course (ex. 2).  
Under a court-approved five-year plan, Applicant has been making his restitution
payments at the rate of $257 a month (Tr. 74-75). To date, he has reduced his restitution
balance to just over $6,000 (Tr. 74-75).  He is current with his monthly payments and
hopes to satisfy the remaining balance within the next 12 months (Tr. 75).
Applicant has satisfactorily completed each of the Court’s imposed conditions,
including his anger management class, and has been informed by his probation officer
that his probation would likely end in November 2009 (Tr. 74,100-03). He maintains
5
contact with his probation officer once a month (Tr. 81). He has undertaken no
psychological counseling since completing his anger management course.  
Post-assault relationship with his family
Applicant lived with his wife for approximately three months following the
September 2005 incident while the mother-in-law was in the hospital recuperating (Tr.
110-11).  Shortly after his mother-in-law returned from the hospital (some three months
later), Applicant received in close succession his letter from the clerk (indicating he was
going to be charged with a felony) and service of a TPO obtained by his wife (Tr. 95,
111-12).  He tried talking to his wife after receiving the TPO papers, but she declined to
address him (Tr. 113-14).  Once he vacated the premises, he was not permitted to talk
with his wife or children.  Later, after Applicant had vacated his home, the presiding court
dissolved this TPO  (Tr. 94-95).
 Applicant and his wife divorced for the second time in Spring 2006 (see exs. 2
and A).  The terms of the divorce decree require Applicant to pay child support to his four
children in the amount of $1,400 a month.  He has visitation rights three times a week,
and is required to keep health insurance on the children (see ex. 2). Applicant and his
wife finalized their divorce in late May 2006. 
Under the terms of their divorce, his wife has exclusive physical custody over their
four children.  Albeit, Applicant has joint legal custody with his ex-wife of his children (Tr.
117). Their home remains under joint ownership; his wife continues to reside in the
residence with their children and pays the monthly mortgage.  Applicant’s unsupervised
visitation privileges entitle him to see his children twice a week, on alternate weekends,
and on holidays (Tr. 77-78). He is authorized to address the children about any problems
that might emerge in their visits with Applicant (Tr. 78-79). 
Since their divorce, Applicant’s wife has not remarried.  He remains on good civil
terms with his ex-wife.  His stepson is currently being home schooled; he uses an on-line
program (Tr. 105).
Applicant expresses considerable remorse for his actions that caused injury to his
mother-in-law.  He realizes that he must do better in controlling his emotions and avoid
any escalation of a dispute, should one arise in the future (Tr. 84-85).  He thinks about
the incident with his mother-in-law every day and recognizes he took the wrong course of
action when he pushed her away from him (Tr. 84).  
Endorsements and performance evaluations
Applicant has excellent performance evaluations to his credit.  He documents
praiseworthy performance credits and promotions in the Air Force over the course of his
20-year career (see ex. D). Applicant’s program chief in his Air Force flight squadron
characterized him as an outstanding employee who has never let his 2005 incident and
6
subsequent divorce affect his work in any way (see ex. V; Tr. 37-38).  He considers the
incident to be out of character for Applicant and an isolated event (Tr. 41-44).
  
Applicant’s current supervisor who interfaced with Applicant while he was still an
Air Force liaison, considers him a very professional and valued employee (see ex. S; Tr.
44-47).  He expressed familiarity with Applicant’s 2005 incident and marital status with
his ex-wife (Tr. 50-52).  Pressed for his understanding of the incident, he indicated the
incident arose out of a heated domestic dispute that got out of hand and prompted
Applicant to push his mother-in-law (Tr. 50).  He recollects Applicant’s being remorseful
over the incident (Tr. 51), and has never observed any violent outburst from Applicant in
the years he has known him (Tr. 51). He credited Applicant with having an even
temperament and the ability to maintain his composure (Tr. 51).  
One of Applicant’s coworkers, who has known him for many years and is familiar
with his 2005 arrest, described him as very knowledgeable of Air Force guidelines and
sensitive to security issues (see ex. Q; Tr. 26-29). He knows Applicant to be very
conscientious and trustworthy, and a devoted technician who has never permitted his
2005 incident with his mother-in-law and continued probation to adversely affect his work
(Tr. 30).  
Applicant’s parents and sister express high regards for Applicant’s reliability and
trustworthiness (see exs. O and P).  His sister characterizes Applicant as a good man
and very worthy of being awarded a security clearance. She credits him with
considerable remorse for his actions and the abiding support he shows for his children
(ex. O).  His parents (both military veterans) stress his Boy Scout and military service,
and assure he could never be a security risk (ex. P).  
Since April 2008, Applicant has dated a colleague he has known for over a year.
She describes him as honest, trustworthy, responsible, and kind (see ex. U). She credits
him with being a devoted father to his four children, who not only supports them
financially, but spends a good deal of quality time with them. She respects him for the
commitments he has made to his children and his work (ex. U). 
Applicant documents numerous meritorious medals and certificates
commemorating his outstanding Air Force achievements (see exs. E through M).  He
provides strong character references from his colleagues and close family members who
credit Applicant with being a devoted father to his four children and a very trustworthy
and conscientious professional in his work (see exs. A, O through R, S, and T). 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
7
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  AG, ¶ 30.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an Applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
8
logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant presents as a conscientious quality assurance inspector with four minor
children to support following his divorce from his wife in 2006.   
Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s felony assault
conviction arising out of a domestic assault incident involving his mother-in-law and
sentencing order which included probation that is not scheduled to expire before
November 2009. 
By itself, Applicant’s 2005 felony domestic violence conviction is serious enough
to be security-significant.  Because his mother-in-law was over 60 years of age when he
pushed her, prosecutors pursued the charges as a felony. Applicant was placed on
probation, though, plus one year of house arrest.  Other imposed court conditions
comprised anger management classes and payment of $15,000 in restitution.  By all
accounts, Applicant has met all of the non-financial conditions and has paid most of the
required restitution with his monthly payments.
Applicable disqualifying conditions under the criminal conduct guideline include
DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(d),
“individual is currently on parole or probation.” While there is some evidence that
Applicant threw a chair at his wife during a heated argument in 1993, the Government
never alleged any criminal conduct in the SOR relative to this somewhat aged allegation,
and the issue was never developed in the produced evidence in this record.  Based on
the limited evidence available, there is not enough to warrant the application of DC ¶
9
31(c), “allegations or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
Before January 2008, certain types of conduct were subject to mandatory
prohibitions against the granting of security clearances under the Smith Amendment (10
U.S.C. § 986), and could not be extenuated nor mitigated.   Conduct subject to the Smith
Amendment’s prohibition included convictions resulting in sentences of more than a
year.  However, this section of the U.S. code, which applied only to clearances granted
by DoD, was repealed on January 28, 2008, when the President signed the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 into law.   It was replaced by adding Sec.
3002 to 50 U.S.C. §435b (the Bond Amendment), which applies throughout the Federal
government. Section 3002(c) continues the requirement of per se disqualification for
certain convictions and sentences. Applicant’s conviction does not involve any of these
defined offenses, and does not fall under the Bond Amendment, as it is currently
constituted.
Applicant’s felony conviction, while serious, resulted in a suspended sentence for
the most part and was replaced with five years of probation and one year of house
arrest, plus added anger management education and restitution to his mother-in-law for
the hurt and medical expenses he caused her. The probation conditions ordered by the
court appear clearly to reflect the court’s appreciation of Applicant’s emotional reaction to
his stepson’s defiant resistance, and perhaps his mother-in-law’s inappropriate
confrontation with Applicant over his exerted attempts to discipline his stepson.
Without any evidence to challenge Applicant’s explanations of the underlying
events and circumstances surrounding his 2005 domestic conviction, the criminal
conduct concerns that are based on this single episode of his physical push of his
mother-in-law are entitled to some crediting of extenuating circumstances. 
Applicant may rely on MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal
behavior happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” Applicant’s 2005 conviction is isolated and outweighed by his substantial
showing of good judgment and trust demonstrated throughout his military and civilian
career.  Applicant also established himself to be a responsible parent who monitored the
educational pursuits of all of his children, including the stepson who often became
defiant with him when he tried to exert discipline in the presence of his mother-in-law.  
In the face of Applicant’s persuasive showing of extenuating circumstances
surrounding his 2005 arrest, his responsible parenting efforts, and his impressive
professional achievements in the Air Force, and in his civilian job assignments, his lone
2005 arrest/conviction (although serious at the time the charges were filed) is not enough
to warrant continuing security concerns about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. 
10
 Based on his own rehabilitative efforts to date (which include anger management
classes, permanent changes in his family environment, and almost four years of
demonstrated responsibility and trust with his children and with his colleagues in the
workplace), the chances of any recurrent domestic actions like the ones that produced
his 2005 conviction are highly unlikely.  Applicant may take advantage of MC ¶ 32(d) of
the criminal conduct guideline, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.”
Both from a consideration of the applicable guidelines, and from a whole person
perspective, Applicant demonstrates he  possesses the strength of overall character and
rehabilitation to meet all of the minimum requirements under the criminal conduct
guideline for continued eligibility to hold a security clearance. Applicant has a long history
of devoted, reliable public service. 
Influenced by the early lessons he acquired in the Boy Scouts, he contributed
over 20 years of meritorious service to the Air Force.  And he has continued to provide
trusted and honored service to his civilian employer, since his Air Force retirement in
2005. 
Applicant  maintains the confidence and trust of past and present supervisors and
program managers familiar with his work and behavior within and without the work place.
He has completed most of his probation conditions and has less than two months
remaining on his court-ordered probation. He has excellent performance evaluations,
awards, and certificates that attest to his good judgment and trustworthiness during and
after the completion of his military career.  
Applicant’s many credits in his life should not be taken to minimize in any way the
seriousness of his actions that resulted in his 2005 guilty plea.  Although stressed at the
time by the defiant behavior of his stepson and the aggressive reactions  of his mother-
in-law, the circumstances clearly did not warrant his pushing his mother-in-law and
causing her to stumble and seriously injure herself.  For his actions, Applicant accepted
responsibility and is very remorseful.  Based on the confluence of corrective steps he
has taken to date, he persuasively demonstrates that he has learned important lessons
from his unfortunate lapses in judgment and familial responsibilities and will work
earnestly to avoid any recurrence.
Applicant’s sister, parents, and current girlfriend bestow their high praise on him in
recognition of his demonstrated strong support for his children and his long and devoted
public service. Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances developed in the
record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.a of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the ¶ 2(a) factors enumerated in the AGs.
11
Formal Findings
   
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:            For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
