                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-04661 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his 
falsification of two public trust position applications and his long-term illegal use of 
marijuana while in a position of trust. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III 
position is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2000 and on September 26, 2007, Applicant submitted Public Trust 
Position Applications (SF 85P). On April 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, detailing the basis for 
its preliminary decision to deny Applicant eligibility for a public trust position, citing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
 
2 
 
 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for a public trust position, and it recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether eligibility should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On May 4, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 9, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 15, 2009. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on July 10, 2009. The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, all of which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 10, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 16, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old software development engineer working for a defense 
contractor. He attended college and received a Bachelor of Science (computer science) 
degree in1992. He has never been married.  
 
Applicant has been employed in the same position since August 1996, albeit 
under different company names (Tr. 37). He submitted his first public trust position 
application in September 2000, and he was granted a public trust position (automated 
data processing (ADP-II) shortly thereafter. He has held that position continuously since 
then.  
 
Applicant has worked as a software development engineer during the last 16 
years. He testified that he is considered to be an above-average software developer 
and he has extensive specialized experience in his field. He is a leader and the “go-to 
guy” in his company. Based on his references’ statements, he is considered to be an 
outstanding employee, hard working, dedicated, responsible, and diligent. He has a 
reputation as a trustworthy and honest person. 
 
Applicant started to use marijuana illegally around 1990, when he was in his 20s 
and attending college (Tr. 38). He knew that his use of marijuana was illegal (Tr. 41). He 
used marijuana because it enhanced his music-listening experience and made him feel 
mellow (Tr. 39). He smoked marijuana every weekend, and went to class at least five 
times under the influence of marijuana (Tr. 41). Applicant continued to use marijuana 
 
3 
 
 
illegally from the 1990s to October 2007. Since around 2000, he used marijuana illegally 
at least once every two or three months (Tr. 87). He also purchased marijuana for 
personal consumption. 
 
In his July 2000 public trust position application, Applicant answered “Yes,” to 
question 16 (asking whether in the last seven years he had been arrested, charged 
with, or convicted of any offenses). He listed a 1994 arrest for Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI), but deliberately failed to disclose that he was arrested in June 1994, 
and charged with Controlled Dangerous Substance – Possession Marijuana and 
Possession Drug Paraphernalia With Intent to Use. He answered “No,” to question 17, 
asking whether in the last year he had used any controlled substance (marijuana). He 
deliberately failed to disclose he had illegally used marijuana with varying frequency 
from 1990 to July 2000.  
 
In his September 2007 public trust position application, Applicant answered “No,” 
to question 21, asking whether in the last year he had used any controlled substance 
(marijuana). He deliberately failed to disclose he had illegally used marijuana with 
varying frequency from 1990 to September 2007. Applicant continued to use marijuana 
after he submitted his 2007 application. 
 
In December 2007, Applicant was confronted by a government investigator about 
his failure to disclose his 1994 drug-related arrest. After he was confronted, Applicant 
decided to be truthful and forthcoming about his illegal drug use and provided additional 
information concerning his drug-related behavior. Applicant admitted that he deliberately 
falsified both public trust position applications because he was embarrassed and 
ashamed of his drug use. He believed it would tarnish his professional reputation and 
affect his livelihood if it were known publicly that he was an illegal drug user (Tr. 45).  
 
Applicant explained that when he took the government job in 2000, he knew the 
rules had changed and that he was required to comply with the law, and that his use of 
illegal drugs would negatively impact his ability to hold a public trust position. Knowing 
the consequences, he elected to continue his drug-related behavior, he just “dialed it 
back” (Tr. 47-51). He also knew his employer had a policy against the use of illegal 
drugs (Tr. 58). 
 
Applicant continues to associate with many of his drug-using friends, most of 
whom he has known for over 20 years. He considers most of his marijuana using 
friends his “brothers.” He has no intention of disassociating himself from his long-time 
friends regardless of the fact that some of them continue to use marijuana (Tr. 69).  
 
Applicant believes he has an alcohol problem and that he drinks too much. He 
goes out to party every weekend with the same long-time drug-using friends he has 
know for the last 20 years. His friends frequently use marijuana when they go to parties. 
However, his friends are aware of his situation and they do not smoke marijuana in his 
presence (Tr. 84). They go to a different room or go outside the house to use the 
marijuana. 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his illegal drug-related behavior and for 
falsifying both public trust position applications. He wants to continue working for the 
government, and believes he has a lot to offer. He promised never to use illegal drugs 
again, and stated his intent never to break the laws again (Tr. 63-65). He also submitted 
a statement of intent to never use illegal drugs in the future with automatic revocation 
for any violation (Tr. 17, AE 9). 
 
Applicant blames his employer for his falsification of both of his public trust 
position applications. He alleged that his employer failed to provide him with adequate 
advice about the adverse consequences he would face for not being truthful in his 
applications (Tr. 17, 89-90). 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s controlling adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and common sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
 
5 
 
 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security/trustworthiness concern 
stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on his 2000 public trust position 
application when he failed to disclose that in 1994, he was arrested and charged with 
illegal drug-related offenses. He also deliberately falsified material facts on both his 
2000 and 2007 public trust position applications when he failed to disclose that he used 
and purchased marijuana illegally from around 1990 to at least September 2007, while 
he held a public trust position. Applicant continued to use marijuana after submitting his 
2007 application. 
 
Applicant’s actions create trustworthiness concerns under two disqualifying 
conditions: AG ¶¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities,” and 16(e) “personal conduct or concealment of information 
about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing.”  
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none apply. Applicant 
falsified both of his SF 85Ps. It was not until after he was confronted during the 
interview process that he admitted his arrest and charges for illegal drug-related 
behavior. He then provided truthful information concerning his long history of illegal drug 
abuse. His falsifications are serious offenses (felony), they are recent, and they cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Moreover, Applicant’s drug-
related behavior increased his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a): “any drug abuse;”1 AG ¶ 25(c): “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia;” and AG ¶ 25(g): “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” 
 
Between 1990 and October 2007, Applicant illegally used, possessed, and 
purchased marijuana with varying frequency. While in college he used marijuana most 
weekends. More recently, he used marijuana illegally once every two to thee months. 
His behavior triggers the applicability of AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g).2 The other 
disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable.  
 
1  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
2  AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none apply. Applicant’s 
long-term history of illegal use of marijuana is recent. His use of marijuana was part of 
Applicant’s partying lifestyle with his long-time college friends. He continues to associate 
with his marijuana-using friends. Applicant specifically ruled out the possibility of 
disassociating himself from these friends. Thus, his questionable behavior is likely to 
recur. Applicant does not understand what is required of him to have the ability to serve 
in a public trust position. 
 
Applicant receives credit for his two-year period of abstinence. He also receives 
credit for his signed statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with automatic revocation 
of eligibility for any violation. Notwithstanding, considering the evidence as a whole, I 
find the drug involvement concerns are not mitigated.  
 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Cocaine and methamphetamine are Schedule II Controlled Substances. See 21 U.S.C § 
812(c)II(a)(4) (cocaine), and II(c) (methamphetamine); United States v. McCourty, 562 F.3d 458 (2nd Cir. 
2008) (cocaine); United States v. Wheeler, 535 F.3d 446 (6th Cir. 2008) (methamphetamine).  
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position, 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well educated 
man. He has been successful working for a defense contractor since 1996. He is 
considered to be an above-average software developer and has extensive specialized 
experience in his field. He is also considered to be an outstanding employee, hard 
working, dedicated, responsible, and diligent. He has a reputation as a trustworthy and 
honest person. There is no evidence of any security violation, or that he is not a 
competent worker. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, there are more substantial circumstances that weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis. He has been illegally using and purchasing 
marijuana with varying frequency since the 1990s. When he started working in 
government contracts in 2000, he was aware of what was required of him to be eligible 
for a public trust position. He deliberately falsified two public trust position applications 
because of his concerns about the adverse effects such information would have on his 
professional reputation and ability to hold a government job. Notwithstanding, he 
continued to illegally use marijuana until October 2007, and he continued to associate 
with his long-time drug-using friends until his hearing date.  
 
Applicant’s behavior and personal conduct raise doubts about his suitability to 
have access to sensitive information, his trustworthiness, and his willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct and drug involvement.  
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy an ADP I/II/III position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP I/II/III position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
