                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06660 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Barbara A. Halpern, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant successfully mitigated the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
On May 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 DOHA amended the SOR on August 2, 2009. Applicant answered the SOR in 
writing on July 15, 2009, and the amended SOR on August 11, 2009. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 5, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 11, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 24, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 
and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I for demonstrative purposes. Applicant did not object and 
they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open until October 8, 2009, to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked AE G 
through L. The government had no objections, the documents were admitted, and the 
record closed.1 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 1, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except 1.d and 1.e. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old and has been working for 40 years. He presently works 
for a federal contactor as a senior scientist. His past experience is as an aerospace 
engineer. His past employment history includes working for a large company for 19 
years and with other companies in his area of expertise. He is married and has three 
grown daughters, one of whom lives with him, with her two children.2   
 
 In 1999, Applicant’s employer sold the division of the company he was working 
with to another company. Applicant received a severance package in the amount of 
approximately $60,000. He was unemployed for a few months before finding another 
job. In 2002, Applicant was working for a company on a project that ended. The 
company reduced its work force and he was laid off. Prior to 2002, Applicant was 
current on all of his bills. He and a colleague decided to start their own business. They 
used their savings and while the business was starting they did not earn an income. 
They were confident that the business would be successful and had promises of 
government contracts. During this time, Applicant stated that the Defense Department 
was shifting its resources from research and development, which his business was 
focused on, to the wars that were being waged. Despite promises and then apologies 
from their potential customers, they did not receive contracts. Applicant had used up his 
savings and was using credit cards to pay his living expenses and business expenses. 
In 2004, they concluded the business had failed, and in May 2004, he found a job.3  
 
 Applicant’s new job with Company X was located more than 100 miles away from 
his home. He commuted to his place of employment daily and his income was 
approximately $82,000. Due to the lengthy commute and the exhausting toll it took on 
him, he resigned and took a different job in May 2005. His salary increased to $90,000. 
He was laid off from this job in May 2007. His delinquent debts increased during this 
1 Department Counsel response was marked as HE II. 
 
2 Tr. 22-25, 67-74. 
 
3 Tr. 27-33, 62-64,106-107. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
period. He was unemployed until October 2007, when he was hired by his current 
employer. His salary is $92,000.4 
 
In 2008, Applicant became eligible to collect his pension. He began receiving 
$1,935 monthly from his pension from the company where he worked for 19 years. In 
June 2009, he began receiving $1,700 from social security benefits.5 
 
 After his business failed, he had incurred approximately $30,000 to $40,000 in 
delinquent debt. He stated he could not pay down the debt while working for Company 
X. He continued to pay two credit cards through 2005. He had approximately $124 
remaining from his salary at the end of each month, after paying his living expenses. 
Each subsequent year, his salary increased slightly, but not enough to begin paying 
back his debt. He stayed current on his mortgage and other living expenses. In 2008, 
when Applicant’s salary increased and he began receiving both his pension and social 
security benefits, he had significant expendable income to begin repaying his creditors, 
which he did.6 
 
 In January and February 2008, Applicant paid off two credit cards that had not 
been delinquent, but had balances. He had made payments on these cards regularly 
and retired the balances.7 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.a ($6,196) is a credit card debt. Applicant settled the debt. He 
made two payment of $3,000. He made a final payment that was received on 
September 28, 2009. The debt has been settled and paid.8  
 
 The debt in SOR 1.b ($13,874) is a credit card debt. Applicant settled the debt in 
February 2009, and received a confirmation of the settlement on September 14, 2009.9  
 
 The debt in SOR 1.c ($12,223) is a credit card debt. Applicant had difficulty 
tracking down the current collection company on this debt. He made arrangements to 
settle the debt with two payments of $3,934 to be paid on September 23, 2009, and a 
second payment of $1,934 to be paid on October 31, 2009. When he makes the final 
payment the debt will be settled.10  
4 Tr. 24-25, 33-36. 
 
5 Tr. 25-27. 
 
6 Tr. 37-44, 81; AE B. 
 
7 AE C. 
 
8 Tr. 45-49; AE C at 7, H. 
 
9 Tr. 49-52; AE C at 4. 
 
10 Tr. 52-56, 88; AE C at 2, G. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR 1.d was a tax lien from 1993. When Applicant changed jobs, 
there were disputed issues regarding travel payments and a severance package and 
their tax consequences. He disputed the issues with the Internal Revenue Service and 
the matter was resolved in 1995. Department Counsel conceded this lien was 
released.11 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.e ($35) is a medical debt that is no longer on Applicant’s 
credit report. He disputed this debt with his medical insurance provider because he 
believed they were responsible for paying it. He wrote the creditor and advised them it 
was the insurance company’s responsibility. The creditor sent the debt to collection. 
Although Applicant disputed owing the debt, he paid it in order to resolve the issue.12 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.f ($168) is a debt to a telephone company. Applicant disputed 
this debt with the creditor. He requested the phone service be discontinued, and the 
company continued to bill him. Even though he disputed the debt, he settled the debt so 
it would be resolved.13 
 
 The debt in SOR 1.g ($1,320) was a homeowner assessment for his house. He 
stopped paying this bill in 2004. The creditor obtained a judgment. Applicant paid the 
judgment.14  
 
 Applicant admitted to paying some of his bill late in the last year. He stated he 
was no more than 30 days late. He also had a dispute with his mortgage company 
regarding insurance. He admitted he did not have insurance on his home for two 
months due to an oversight. He has resolved the issues with his insurance company 
and is current on his bills. He has not received any financial counseling. Applicant 
presently has sufficient income to pay all of his monthly expenses and other debts.15 
 
 Applicant provided nine character letters.16 In the letters, he is described as 
trustworthy and ethical, with the highest level of integrity and professionalism. He is 
characterized as an expert in his field, who is reliable, disciplined and self-motivated. He 
is recommended for a security clearance.17 
 
 
11 Tr. 15-17, 56-58; GE 6 and 7; AE C at 12. 
 
12 Tr. 58-59, 82-83; AE C at 11. 
 
13 Tr. 59-60, 82-83; AE C at 8-9, I. 
 
14 Tr. 60-62, 81-82, 103; AE C at 13, J. 
 
15 Tr. 90-105, 111-114. 
 
16 AE F. 
 
17 Id. Tr. 65-66. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts after experiencing a failed business 
venture in 2002. Many of his debts remained delinquent for several years. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant paid all of the debts alleged in the SOR. He experienced financial 
problems when he and his business partner started a new business and it failed. They 
were confident they would receive government contracts, but due to the changing needs 
of the Defense Department, the contracts never materialized. Applicant invested his 
personal savings into the business. When it failed he used credit cards to pay for his 
needs. I find that the conditions that resulted in his financial problems were beyond his 
control. He stayed current on some of his bills and others became delinquent. When he 
began receiving his pension, he systematically resolved his delinquent debts. Applicant 
now earns a sufficient income that is enhanced by his pension and social security 
benefits. The circumstances that caused his financial hardship are unlikely to recur and 
Applicant acted responsibly when his employment situation changed. I find mitigating 
conditions (a) and (b) apply. Applicant has resolved his delinquent debts, he is earning 
sufficient income to pay his bills, and his finances are under control. He has paid all of 
his creditors and is living within his means. He disputed some debts, but decided to pay 
them to resolve the issues. I find mitigating conditions (c), (d) and (e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced financial 
problems when he started a business that failed due to issues beyond his control. He 
lost his savings and used credit cards so he could live. Once he began working again 
and earning a salary, he systematically paid his delinquent debts. He now has sufficient 
 
8 
 
 
income and lives within his means. Overall, the record evidence does not leave me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
