 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07532 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H and E, Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 2, 2009, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
 
2 
 
the government’s written case on July 31, 2009. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on August 7, 2009. As of October 8, 2009, she had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since May 2008. She is seeking a security clearance for the first 
time. She has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in May 2008. She is single with 
no children.1  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana about 100 times between 2001 and January 2008. 
She used cocaine on two occasions between 2004 and 2006. She was arrested in 
2005, and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol/drugs, possession 
of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, and failure to provide proof of 
insurance. The police found marijuana and a pipe in her glove box after she was 
stopped for swerving. She pled guilty to DUI and possession of marijuana, and the other 
charges were dismissed. She was sentenced to 30 days in jail with credit for time 
served, fined $600, and ordered to attend an alcohol/substance abuse education 
treatment program. The program consisted of ten alcohol classes over the course of two 
months. She completed the program in July 2005.2 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) and 
certified that her answers were true on May 13, 2008. Section 24b asked: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that between “08/2001 (Estimated)” and “06/2006 
(Estimated)” she used marijuana 50 times. She also listed that she used cocaine on two 
occasions between May 2004 and January 2006. She listed her 2005 arrest for DUI and 
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia under other questions. Applicant 
admitted that she intentionally provided false information by minimizing the amount of 
times she used marijuana and by stating her last illegal drug use was in June 2006. She 
was concerned about the impact that revealing her complete drug use would have on 
her new job.3 She stated in her response to the SOR: 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 4-7. 
 
3 Items 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
I made some bad decisions when I was younger, but I decided to 
straighten up and go back to school to receive a degree and get a “real” 
job. [Employer] is what I found and I would hate for my poor decision 
making to ruin this job for me. There’s no excuse for me lying about the 
dates and number of times I used marijuana.  
 
 Applicant revealed her full drug use when she was interviewed for her 
background investigation in June 2008. She has not used illegal drugs since January 
2008. She stated that she has learned from her mistakes and has “no intention of using 
drugs again because they are illegal and harmful to her body.”4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
                                                          
4 Items 4, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;5 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant’s cocaine and marijuana possession and use are sufficient to raise AG 
¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
 
                                                          
5 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
 
 
5 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant used cocaine on two occasions between 2004 and 2006. She used 
marijuana about 100 times between 2001 and January 2008. She has not used any 
illegal drugs since January 2008. She graduated from college in May 2008, and 
obtained a “real” job that same month with her current employer. She has stated a firm 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future. There is no bright-line rule as to whether 
conduct is recent. Applicant has not used illegal drugs in about 22 months. However, 
her drug use was extensive, occurred over the course of several years, and she was 
untruthful on her SF 86 about how many times she used marijuana and when she 
stopped using marijuana. Her drug use continues to cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable. Applicant has stated 
that she does not intend to abuse drugs in the future. She does not receive full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale discussed above. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified her SF 86 in May 2008, when she minimized the 
amount of times she used marijuana and stated that she did not use illegal drugs after 
June 2006. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant discussed her full drug use when she was interviewed for her 
background investigation in June 2008. That does not constitute a prompt, good-faith 
effort to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts. While she 
receives credit for discussing the information with the investigator, it is insufficient to 
establish a mitigating condition. I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 29 years old. She lied about her drug use on her SF 86. She deserves 
some credit for being truthful about her drug use in her background interview in June 
2008, and for abstaining from drug use after January 2008. She appears to be 
remorseful, but at this time, concerns remain about her truthfulness, judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
