 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04110
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is granted.
On March 8, 2006, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86)
to renew a security clearance required for his job with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a set of written
interrogatories regarding potentially adverse information in his background. Based on
the results of the background investigation and his response to the interrogatories,
DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is1
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s clearance. On
October 31, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were2
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official revision of the Directive,
the revised guidelines replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 Identified in the transcript at pp. 24 - 33.3
 Identified in the transcript at pp. 14 - 19.4
2
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG)  under Guideline M (use of information technology systems).2
On December 19, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2009. Pursuant to a Notice of
Hearing issued on July 6, 2009, I convened a hearing on July 30, 2009, at which the
parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented four evidentiary exhibits
included in the record without objection as Gx. 1 - 4. The government also proffered four
documents for purposes of administrative notice, which were included in the record as
judicial exhibits (Jx.) I - IV.  Applicant testified and submitted four exhibits admitted3
without objection as Ax. A - D. Also included in the record are 10 documents attached to
Applicant’s response to the SOR.  DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on4
August 7, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
The single allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a) in this case is as follows:
On or about January 15, 2004, you were investigated for using your
government computer to improperly and without authorization, access
computer systems at [an American military installation], for having
installed on your computer inappropriate and non-sanctioned software,
and having downloaded to your assigned computer’s hard-drive classified
information regarding contracts for which you were not authorized to [sic]
access and had no justification for doing so. The investigation revealed
that your activities, which lasted from October 2003 and [sic] January
2004, violated base computer policy. As a result of the investigation you
were reassigned and barred from computer access on the Base during the
remainder of your assignment there.
On June 17, 2009, the government moved to amend the SOR by removing the
word “classified.” There being no objection at hearing, I granted the government’s
motion. (Tr. 11) Accordingly, the information at issue was either business-sensitive or
other information to which Applicant allegedly was not authorized access.
In response to the SOR, as to the allegation that he was not authorized to access
the information systems, or parts thereof, at the military installation where he worked,
Applicant denied that he did so without authorization. He claimed that his access was
both verbally authorized and inherently part of his assigned duties as a Functional
Systems Administrator (FSA). As to the allegation that he downloaded and stored on his
3
government computer unauthorized software, Applicant admitted doing so. However, he
claimed that, while the software was not authorized, he obtained the software in an
effort to improve his ability to perform his FSA duties. In response to the allegation that
he improperly, and without authorization or need, downloaded to his computer hard-
drive contract information, Applicant again denied that he was not authorized access to
that information. He also asserted that the information at issue was inadvertently
downloaded, and that whatever was downloaded was not released outside of any
Department of Defense computer system. In addition to the admissions of fact
contained in Applicant’s answer, I make the following additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 39-year-old network systems engineer. He and his wife have been
married since April 1994, and they have two children (ages 14 and 11). In August 2005,
he began working for a temporary agency that placed him with a defense contractor,
which hired him as a full-time employee in November 2005. He still works for that
contractor as a senior network administrator and site manager. Applicant enjoys a good
reputation for reliability, honesty, and professionalism at his current company. (Answer
to the SOR) He is studying for his bachelor’s degree in computer management, and
has nine more classes to complete. Applicant was in the United States Navy from
January 1991 until January 1999. He served as an aviation electronics technician (AT)
and was honorably discharged as a second class petty officer (paygrade E-5). (Gx. 1;
Tr. 56 - 57, 61 - 62, 106) 
In March 2002, Applicant was hired by a defense contractor to work as an FSA at
an overseas U.S. military installation. The company’s contract with that installation
called for base-wide support for information technology systems management and
assurance, as well as a host of other facilities support services. The contract was known
as the Base Maintenance Contract (BMC) and was valued at $22 million over five years.
(Gx. 3)
The base where Applicant worked was divided organizationally into functional
departments for Civil Engineering (CE), Communications, Contracts, and Quality
Assurance (QA). CE was responsible for all facilities maintenance and construction
matters. Communications was responsible for all matters related to IT systems. 
Each department had its own computer servers dedicated to storing and
processing their information on an IT system, which was used throughout the military
branch involved here. It stored and processed information across departments
concerning contracts, fuel, supplies, construction, facilities maintenance, and other
matters related to running the base. Access to each server was generally limited to
personnel within a given department. However, because of their duties, some personnel
had access to multiple or all servers across departmental boundaries. 
On December 12, 2002, Applicant was appointed as his company’s operations
supervisor for all IT matters within CE. (Attachment to SOR Answer) He testified that his
duties also included assignment as a QA representative for the principle IT system he
worked on. For access purposes, Applicant was assigned as a work group manager
(WM), which, by system design, allowed him access to a variety of servers, including
the Contracts Server. (Tr. 58 - 62)
4
The Contracts Department handled matters ranging from requisition of supplies
to contract bids, contract performance monitoring, contract awards, and other business-
related matters for the command. Contained in the Contracts Server was, in relevant
part, information about contracts between the military facility and its defense
contractors, including the BMC itself. Other information ranged from the actual contract
and bid specifications to Powerpoint slides presenting information about costs and other
measures of contractor performance. (Gx. 3)
On January 15, 2004, military investigators were advised that there had been
several instances of unauthorized access into the Contracts Server by an employee of
Applicant’s company. The investigation quickly yielded information sufficient for agents
to seize Applicant’s government computer. On January 16, 2004, Applicant’s access to
government IT systems was cancelled and he was assigned other duties pending
completion of the investigation. Specifically, it was found that over a three-month period
ending on January 8, 2004, Applicant accessed the Contracts Server up to 30 times. It
was also found that Applicant accessed the government computer assigned to a military
officer in the Contracts Department at least 20 times. During the three-month period in
question, Applicant was on holiday leave for 19 days between December 2003 and
January 2004. (Gx. 3; Attachments to Answer)
Inspection of Applicant’s government computer showed that a copy of the BMC
was located on the hard drive. Applicant explained that he did not intentionally
“download” the BMC. While testing the vulnerabilities of the base-wide IT system, he
accessed the Contracts server as a WM. The BMC file was created using one
application, but he opened the BMC file in an application different from the one the file
was created in. When exiting the file, he was prompted to decide whether to save the
file in the application he used rather than the original application. He asserted that he
said “yes,” but that the result was that a copy was saved to his computer. (Tr. 97) He did
not explain why he answered “yes” rather than leave the BMC in its original state, or
why he did not delete it from his computer, or why there were other related files on his
computer. He also did not explain why he had to access the Contracts Server more than
30 times, or the officer’s computer more than 20 times, or the BMC itself to test system
vulnerabilities.
Inspection of Applicant’s computer also showed that he had stored several
software applications on his computer. Applicant acknowledged that he needed
permission from the designated point of contact (a junior enlisted person at either the E-
3 or E-4 paygrade) in the base Communications Department before downloading or
installing any hardware on his computer. He claimed he did so as to some of the
software, but also admitted there were several unauthorized software applications
stored on his computer. He knew at the time that only software on an approved list
could be loaded onto DoD computers. However, he also claimed that he did not actually
install any of the software. He looked at it to see if he could use it in support of his FSA
duties. He had intended to transfer the software to a compact disk, but he did not
explain why he would even keep the software. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 3; Tr. 53 - 56, 68 -
76)
5
Investigative interviews were conducted with personnel and technicians, both
military and civilian, from the Contracts and Communications Departments. Several of
those interviewed questioned whether anyone outside of the Contracts Department
should have access to the contracts server. (Gx. 3) However, the same investigative
report also showed that the Applicant had broad access throughout the system by virtue
of his designation as a WM. The IT system was set up so that all WM’s had access
across the system regardless of whether they worked in CE or QA or Contracts. 
The investigative report also found that Applicant had complained to the
Communications Department about this configuration and suggested that it be changed
to be more restrictive as to who had access to various data bases, including the
Contracts Server. Three times the permissions were changed, but each time the
permissions were reinstated. Applicant explained that this occurred because of the way
the system was designed. Once that was changed, the restricted access remained
permanent. (Gx. 3, Section 2-3; Tr. 88 - 92)  
The investigation into Applicant’s actions did not result in any disciplinary action
against the Applicant. The report of investigation did not contain any conclusions about
what happened or about culpability. Further, there is no indication that the information
Applicant accessed was ever compromised or used for improper purpose. The report
did not cite any specific regulation or procedure at the base or from other authority that
Applicant may have violated. Finally, there was no finding that any of the software was
actually installed in the DoD system in question, or that the software was designed or
intended for malicious purpose.
In January 2004, Applicant lost his access to the information systems and was
assigned other duties pending the outcome of the investigation. In July 2004, he took
extended leave due to a death in the family. When that leave expired, he asked for and
was granted a two-year leave of absence, because he did not want to sit idle pending
completion of the military’s investigation into his conduct. He was never advised of any
investigative conclusions. His employment with that contractor ended in August 2006
when he let pass the deadline for advising the company that he was returning from his
leave of absence. (Ax. A)
Department Counsel asked that administrative notice be taken of four documents
or publications. All four provide guidance and definitions regarding DoD information
systems management and protection. Department Counsel specifically cited section
4.19 of DoD Directive 8500.1 (Jx. I), which requires that software available from public
sources “shall only be used in DoD information systems to meet compelling
requirements.” DoD Instruction 8500.2 (Jx. II) provides extensive definitions within the
DoD Information Assurance Program and provides guidance for implementing that
program. However, neither party argued for application of any specific provision of that
document to the facts in this case. Jx. III is the instruction that provides network user
licensing and network professional certification guidance for the military branch
Applicant was supporting. It addressed the FSA by saying that FSA’s “must thoroughly
understand the customer’s mission and stay completely knowledgeable of the hardware
and software capabilities and limitations.” (Jx. III, p. 12) Of WM’s, this document stated,
“WMs possess developed knowledge of hardware, software, and communications
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
6
principles, and install, configure, and operate client/server devices. They resolve day-to-
day administrative and technical problems users experience and contact their . . . FSA
or [help desk] if they cannot resolve their problem.” (Jx. III, p. 13) Finally, Department
Counsel cited in Jx. IV, an excerpt from the Federal Acquisition Regulations System
(FARS), which generally prohibits unauthorized disclosure of “contractor bid or proposal
information or source selection information before the award of a Federal agency
procurement contract to which the information relates.” (48 C.F.R. § 3.104-4(a))
 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 39 (Guideline M - Use of Information Technology Systems).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
7
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
Analysis
Use of Information Technology Systems
The government allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, if proved, would raise a security
concern addressed in AG ¶ 39 as follows: 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related  computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
I have considered the available disqualifying factors listed under AG ¶ 40 as
these facts apply to them. At the outset, the facts and circumstances of this case do not
require or support consideration of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 40(b)
(illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial of access to
information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information technology system), AG ¶
40(c) (use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access to another
system or to a compartmented area within the same system), AG ¶ 40(d) (downloading,
storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any unauthorized software,
hardware, or information technology system), AG ¶ 40(g) (negligence or lax security
habits in handling information technology that persist despite counseling by
management), and AG ¶ 40(h) (any misuse of information technology, whether
deliberate or negligent, that results in damage to the national security).
As to AG ¶ 40(a) (illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology
system or component thereof), and AG ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or
other information technology system), it does not appear that Applicant’s access to the
8
Contracts Server or the officer’s computer was either illegal or unauthorized. Within the
broad terms of his job description as an FSA and his access as a WM, along with the
access designed into the IT system in question, it appears it was perfectly legitimate for
Applicant to access both components. It may be that the IT system should not have
been designed to allow him access as he was a contractor employee. But all of the
available information shows that he was authorized to access the files and information
in question. The more salient question is whether it was acceptable for a contractor to
access the BMC or other such information. At the very least, his actions created the
appearance of impropriety, in that, as a contractor, he possessed information that
potentially could have given his company an unfair advantage when it came to bidding
on renewal of the contract in question. However, there is no information about whether
the contract was due for renewal, or whether the information was passed to anyone who
might use it for that purpose. 
Unanswered by the Applicant are reasonable questions regarding the number of
times he accessed the Contracts Server and the officer’s server in such a brief period.
He claimed he was required to test the IT system vulnerabilities, and to maintain and
improve the system’s efficiency. He has not explained why he accessed the Contracts
Server or the officer’s computer so many times, or, for that matter, why it was necessary
to access those particular aspects of the IT system in the first place. However, because
Applicant denied the aspect of this allegation regarding access to the IT system, the
government was required to present sufficient reliable information to show that his
access was “illegal or unauthorized,” and not simply improper or unwise. AG ¶ 40(a)
does not apply.
The disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 40(f) (introduction, removal, or duplication of
hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information technology system
without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations)
must also be considered. It is uncontroverted that Applicant stored software on his
government computer he knew was not on a list of approved software. However, it was
not established that the software that was actually installed and was in use on his
computer. Nonetheless, his actions constituted “introduction” for purposes of AG ¶ 40(f),
and Applicant knew it was prohibited to put the software on his computer as he did. AG
¶ 40(f) applies.
By contrast, the record as a whole also supports the mitigating condition at AG ¶
41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). It has been more than five
years since Applicant left his position pending the outcome of the investigation. There
is, as yet, no conclusion by those involved with the investigation about whether
Applicant did anything to justify revocation of his system access. Since leaving that job,
he has worked for his current employer with good results and without incident. His
referrals praise his reliability and expertise, and it does not appear that he has or will
repeat his past mistakes regarding software introduction. The other mitigating conditions
under AG ¶ 41 do not apply.
9
As to any specific rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations that may have
been violated, the information presented through Jx. I - IV provided definitions helpful in
understanding Applicant’s FSA and WM duties. At the DoD level, Jx. I made clear that
software introduction should be done pursuant to a “compelling requirement.” However,
there is nothing in the record, especially in the Report of Investigation (ROI) in Gx. 2,
that cites specific rules or procedures, either instituted by the base military organization
or by Applicant’s company, that he violated. Further, other than the opinions of those
interviewed during the investigation, the ROI contains no conclusions about procedural
or rules violations, and no conclusions about culpability. On balance, I conclude the
security concerns raised by the available information are mitigated.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline M. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 39 years old,
married for more than 15 years, and the father of two. He is also a veteran of the U.S.
Navy and has been steadily employed without incident since his honorable discharge in
1999. He is also studying for a bachelor’s degree related to his field of expertise. Aside
from an inconclusive investigation into his access to an IT system for which he was, at
least partially responsible, there is no information that would support a conclusion that
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness are not sufficient for purposes of
access to classified information. A fair and commonsense evaluation of this record
shows that the security concerns raised by Applicant’s conduct relative to information
technology systems are mitigated. Any doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
