KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct and an applicant’s
trustworthiness eligibility.  An applicant with exemplary job performance may engage in conduct
that has negative trustworthiness implications.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-07290.a1
DATE: 11/17/2009
DATE: November 17, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 08-07290
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On April 22, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 21, 2009, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Specifically, Applicant maintains that no evidence was presented at
the hearing to show that his financial situation would cause him to engage in criminal activity or
cause a security breach.  Applicant also notes that he will not be able to improve his financial
situation if he loses his job due to denial of a trustworthiness designation.  Finding no error, we
affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: Applicant is 30 years old and
provides technical support to a Defense contractor.  The SOR in Applicant’s case lists seven overdue
debts (primarily credit card balances and a car repossession).  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant
admits all of the debts, but disputes the amounts owed to two of the creditors.  Applicant’s credit was
good until he lost a job in 2003.  Applicant states that he lost that job because his employer found
out that he was seeking another job.  Applicant was out of work for approximately a month and then
began working at a job that paid about half his former salary.  After about a year, Applicant began
working for his current employer at approximately the salary he was earning before he lost his job
in 2003 and now earns more that he did at the job he lost.  Applicant has made no payments on the
overdue debts since 2003, although he had indicated that he would begin doing so in 2007.  A
supervisory witness from Applicant’s job testified that he is a good person and a conscientious and
dependable worker.
     A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).
Applicant contends that there is no evidence that he is a security risk or would commit any
type of crime because of his financial situation.  Applicant admitted the alleged overdue debts listed
in the SOR, even if he disputed some of the amounts.  The Directive presumes there is a nexus, or
rational connection, between proven conduct under any of its Guidelines and an applicant’s
trustworthiness eligibility.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 07-07799 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2008).
Therefore, Department Counsel is not required to present evidence that shows a direct or objective
nexus between an applicant’s conduct and circumstances and their trustworthiness eligibility.  The
federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to properly handle
sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.  See, e.g, ADP Case
No. 06-09293 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2007).  Trustworthiness determinations are not limited to
consideration of an applicant’s job performance or conduct during duty hours, and off-duty conduct
can be relevant in assessing an applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-
07581 at 2 (App. Bd. May 17, 2007).  An applicant with good or exemplary job performance may
engage in conduct that has negative trustworthiness implications.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-09293
supra at 2.  The Directive’s Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and
circumstances which are of trustworthiness concern to the government.
In his response to the government’s SOR, Applicant admitted the alleged overdue debts.  His
admissions established the government’s prima facie case.  The burden then shifted to Applicant to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts he admitted.  The ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable trustworthiness determination rests with Applicant.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 06-13629 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sep. 4, 2007).
Applicant testified that his financial situation was due to events beyond his control in his
work history and that he planned to begin paying his overdue debts soon. The Judge weighed the
mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying
conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating conditions.  He reasonably
explained why the evidence Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome  the
government’s trustworthiness concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the
record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under
Guideline F is sustainable.  Thus, the Judge did not err in denying Applicant a trustworthiness
designation.
Applicant contends that an negative trustworthiness determination will cause him to lose his
job and therefore his ability to repay his overdue debts.  The adverse effect that an unfavorable
trustworthiness determination might have on Applicant’s employment is not a factor that can be
considered in evaluating an applicant’s trustworthiness eligibiility.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 07-
09114 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2009). 
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
