  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06044 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le'i, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Duke Woolley 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has two unpaid judgments and four other delinquent accounts totaling 
in excess of $17,500. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 28, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. The SOR was received on April 22, 2009. 
 
  On April 29, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
June 25, 2009, I was assigned the case. On June 26, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing, which was to be held on July 14, 2009. On July 13, 
2009, Applicant requested and was granted a continuance. On August 10, 2009, DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing, which was to be held on September 
1, 2009. On August 31, 2009, another continuance was requested when Applicant’s 
representation stated he had just been retained. A continuance was again granted. On 
September 14, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing, which 
was held on October 14, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and offered one document, which was 
admitted into evidence as Ex. A. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On October 30, 2009, additional information was submitted. 
Department Counsel having no objection, it was admitted into the record as Ex. B 
through Ex. I. On October 19, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i as she asserts these debts have been satisfied. She 
admitted the factual allegations, with explanations, in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 
1.o of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are admitted as fact. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old diplomatic security officer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since August 2007. She is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s September 6, 2007, credit bureau report (CBR) lists judgments filed 
against Applicant by six creditors between August 2002 and June 2005. (Ex. 7) In 
November 2002, a $3,896 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.e) was entered against Applicant. (Ex. 3, 
Ex. 7) In February 2003, a $639 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.f) was entered against Applicant. 
(Ex. 4, Ex. 7) In January 2009, this judgment was paid in full. (Ex H) In January 2006, a 
$577 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.k) was entered against Applicant. (Ex. 5, Ex. 7) This judgment 
has not been paid. In January 2006, Applicant satisfied a $1,908 judgment entered 
against her for delinquent rent. (Ex. B) The judgment had been entered against her in 
June 2005. (Ex. 7) This judgment was not alleged as an obligation of concern in the 
SOR.  
 
 On April 14, 2004, Applicant completed a sworn affidavit addressing her past due 
financial obligations. (Ex. 9) As of April 2004, Applicant’s net monthly remainder 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
(monthly net gross income less monthly expenses and monthly debt payments) was 
approximately $1,000. (Ex. 9) She stated she had filed for bankruptcy three times in the 
past seven years. She stated in 1997, she had taken on too much credit card debt and 
was unable to manage that debt. (Ex. 9) In December 1997, she filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection. In May 1998, the plan was dismissed due to failure to make her 
required payments. (Ex. 12) In August 1998, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
resulting in the discharge of her debts. (Ex. 11) In November 2001, she filed for Chapter 
13, wage earner’s plan, bankruptcy protection. On March 18, 2002, the bankruptcy was 
dismissed. (Ex. 10) 
 
 In April 2005, while working as a civilian employee, the Department of the Navy 
Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF) issued a letter of intent (LOI) to Deny Security 
Clearance and Eligibility for Assignment to a Sensitive Position. An SOR which 
accompanied the LOI listed nine collection accounts, four judgments, two garnishments, 
three bad debts, and one account past due. In her response to the LOI, Applicant 
indicated a number of the listed debts had been paid in full. Her commander’s letter of 
August 2005, stated Applicant asserted she had resolved her outstanding debts, but 
failed to document her assertions. She provided no evidence that any payment 
arrangement had been made. (Ex. 8) Applicant left her job after she appealed her denial 
and before a final denial was issued. 
 
 In October 2005, the DON CAF issued a letter of Final Denial (LOD) of Security 
Clearance and Eligibility for Assignment to Sensitive Position stating Applicant had 
failed to provide documented proof of her effort to resolve or make arrangements for 
payment to her creditors. Additionally, her clearance was denied because her financial 
problems continued after her bankruptcies. (Ex. 8)  
 
 On December 8, 2005, Applicant appealed the DON CAF’s denial of her security 
clearance. The DON found her appeal raised no new information to support 
reconsideration. Applicant failed to show the debts were being resolved and failed to 
provide evidence she was trying to pay her debts. (Ex. 8) On May 25, 2006, the 
Department of Navy Personnel Security Appeals Board (PSAB) upheld the denial of her 
security clearance and eligibility for assignment to sensitive positions.  
 
 The April 2005 SOR and the January 2009 SOR list four of the same unpaid 
obligations. The $7,670 judgment resulting from an involuntary vehicle repossession 
(SOR ¶ 1.b) is listed in both. The $3,897 judgment resulting from a vehicle repossession 
(SOR ¶ 1.e) is listed in both. The $639 judgment resulting from a fitness club 
membership (SOR ¶ 1.f) is listed in both. This debt had been placed for collection (SOR 
¶ 1.h) before it went to judgment.  
 
 In September 2008, Applicant answered written interrogatories concerning her 
financial obligations. At that time, her net monthly income was approximately $1,800, 
her monthly expenses were $400, and her monthly net remainder was approximately 
$1,400. Ex. 2) In Applicant’s response to the written interrogatories, she indicated 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
certain debts have been fully paid. She attached documents showing her car loan on 
her 1996 Honda had been paid in full, two medical bills were paid, and payments made 
to nine other accounts. (Ex. 2) 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant sought assistance from a law firm to work with the 
credit bureaus and her creditors. (Ex. C) It was asserted the CBRs were inaccurate, 
invalid, or unverifiable. However, no specific basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of the 
past-due debts in the SOR was shown. Nor did she provide any documentation 
supporting a disputed debt.  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant submitted a document showing she had paid an 
attorney to file for bankruptcy protection two days prior and that her $1,929 student loan 
was paid-in-full. (Ex. A, Ex. G) This was not a debt of concern listed in the SOR. Since 
April 2009, when Applicant received the SOR, she has not made payment on any of the 
obligations listed in the SOR.  
 
 The SOR lists three unpaid judgments and eight accounts placed for collection, 
which totaled approximately $20,000. A summary of those debts follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Bank account placed 
for collection.  
$417 On March 12, 2009, $313.50 was paid. (Ex. 
D) 
b Involuntary automobile 
repossesion.  
$7,670 
 
Unpaid. This debt was also listed in April 23, 
2005 SOR. (Ex. 8) 
c Payday loan placed for 
collection. 
$400 
 
Applicant asserted the debt has been paid. 
However, no documentation was received 
supporting this assertion.  
d Collection firm 
collection for a 
overdraft on a bank 
checking account.  
$173 September 10, 2008, debt was satisfied in full. 
(Ex. F). 
e November 2002 
judgment entered for a 
vehicle repossession.  
$3,897 Unpaid. This debt was also listed in April 23, 
2005 SOR. (Ex. 8) 
f Judgment obtained in 
February 2003, by 
fitness club.  
$639 January 23, 2009, judgment was paid in full. 
(Ex. H) This debt was also listed in April 23, 
2005 SOR. (Ex. 8) 
g Collection company 
collecting a medical 
account. 
$92 Applicant asserts there is a zero balance on 
this account. However, no documentation 
supporting the assertion was received.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
h Collection agency 
collecting for a bank 
account placed for 
collection. 
$431 Collection account later was reduced to 
judgment and is the same debt as listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
i Collection agency 
collecting for an account 
placed for collection. 
$617 Paid. November 21, 2008, the claim was 
released. (Ex. E) 
j Account placed for 
collection 
 
 
 
$4,892 Asserts this is the same debt as the debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.e, but submitted no 
documentation supporting her assertion. 
Applicant stated she would pay $200 in 
October 2007 and $350 every two 
weeks thereafter. Applicant failed to 
document that payments have been 
made.  
k Judgment obtained in 
January 2006. 
$577 Unpaid.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $19,374 Applicant has addressed four of the 
debts (a, d, f, and i), which total $1,846. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be negligent, 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant has resorted to bankruptcy protection three times in the past and 
two days before the hearing, she paid an attorney to again file for bankruptcy protection. 
Applicant has two unpaid judgments and four other past due obligations that total 
approximately $17,500. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Prior to receipt of the SOR, Applicant paid five debts totaling approximately 
$2,300: ¶ 1.a ($417), ¶ 1.d ($173), ¶ 1.f ($639), ¶ 1.h ($431), and ¶ 1.i ($617). AG ¶ 
20(d) applies to these five debts. She also paid two obligations not listed in the SOR. In 
January 2006, she paid a $1,900 judgment for delinquent rent and in June 2005, she 
paid her $1,929 student loan.  
 
The six remaining debts are unpaid. Applicant meets none of the mitigating 
factors for these obligations. Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and 
did not occur under circumstances not likely to recur. She failed to demonstrate that her 
debts were largely due to circumstances beyond her control, or that she has acted 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
responsibly in addressing her debts. Further, she has not sought credit counseling, or 
otherwise brought the problem under control as her circumstances permitted.  
 
Applicant should have been acutely aware of the government’s concern about 
her delinquent financial obligations. In October 2005, the Navy denied her a security 
clearance stating she had failed to provide proof of her effort to resolve or make 
arrangements to her creditors. In December 2005, she appealed that denial. After she 
left the Navy, the denial was upheld. This should have put her on notice that her unpaid 
debts were of security concern.  
 
Two of the debts listed in her most recent SOR were also alleged in the DON 
CAF SOR. These two debts, SOR ¶ 1.b ($7,670) and SOR ¶ 1.e ($3,897), both resulted 
from vehicle repossessions. One debt (SOR ¶ 1.e) was reduced to judgment in 
November 2002 and has yet to be paid.  
 
The mitigating factors listed in AG ¶ 20(a) do not apply to the remaining unpaid 
obligations. The debts are not infrequent, nor did they occur under such circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. Applicant=s financial problems have existed for a long period of 
time. She has had to resort to bankruptcy protection four times, the most recent filing 
being two days before her hearing. Her unpaid obligations do cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
There has been no showing her financial problems were caused by events 
beyond her control. AG & 20(b) does not apply. Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), 
Applicant has paid five of the eleven debts. The total amount of unpaid debt is 
approximately $17,500. Since receiving the SOR in April 2009, she has not made a 
payment on the SOR debts. AG & 20(c) does not apply. 
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply. In September 2008, Applicant retained a law firm to 
assist her in working with the credit bureaus and her creditors. Applicant failed to 
document a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of any past-due. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. An applicant is not 
required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given her 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
“concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has failed 
to do this.  
 
 Applicant has an unpaid judgment obtained against her in 2002. In 2005, the 
Navy denied her a security clearance. Her appeal in the matter was denied. This should 
have put her on notice that her unpaid debts were of security concern and that paying 
her debts or arranging a repayment plan was necessary. However, since receiving the 
SOR, she has taken no effective action to resolve her debts, and has not equipped 
herself to avoid financial problems in the future. She has not made a single payment on 
her past due obligations. Nor has she contacted her creditors to establish a repayment 
plan. The mere hiring of an attorney in preparation of filing for bankruptcy protection is 
insufficient to establish she has taken effective action to resolve her debts. There is no 
evidence a bankruptcy has been filed. There is no guarantee that even if a bankruptcy 
petition has been or were to be filed that a discharge of creditors would occur. Applicant 
has previously had two bankruptcy petitions dismissed. 
 
 I find Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is no 
indication that the problem is being resolved or is under control. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h and 1.i:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j and 1.k:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
