 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-08609
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is denied.
On or about March 5, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive
Positions (SF-86) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) twice sent
interrogatories to Applicant to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about
adverse information in his background.  Based on the results of the background1
investigation, including Applicant’s response to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the revised adjudicative guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the revised adjudicative guidelines replace the guidelines listed in Enclosure
2 to the Directive.
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On May 8,
2009, DOHA sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise
security concerns addressed in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)  under3
Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline H (drug involvement).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on July 24, 2009. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on August 10,
2009, I convened the hearing on August 27, 2009, at which the parties appeared as
scheduled. The government presented three exhibits (Gx. 1 - 3). Applicant testified on
his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on September 8, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant used marijuana or hashish
with varying frequency between September 2001 and September 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a(1));
between 1983 and 1988 (SOR ¶ 1.a(2)); between 1976 and 1977 (SOR ¶ 1.a(3)); and
between 1967 and 1974 (SOR ¶ 1.a(4)). It was also alleged that he sold marijuana in
2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he used LSD about five times between October 1967 and
August 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c); that he used hallucinogenic mushrooms in June 2003 and
August 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.d); that he used cocaine in 1972, 1975, 1977, and 1985 (SOR ¶
1.e); that he used quaaludes in 1972 (SOR ¶ 1.f); that he used amphetamines in 1968
and 1970 (SOR ¶ 1.g); that he was charged with possession of marijuana with intent to
sell in 1968 (SOR ¶ 1.h); that he used mescaline in about 1967 (SOR ¶ 1.I); and that he
used opium in 1967 (SOR ¶ 1.j)
The government further alleged in the SOR that Applicant stated, during a
December 13, 1977, subject interview with a DoD investigator, that if drug use would
jeopardize his suitability for access to classified information, he would cease all future
drug use (SOR ¶ 2.a); and that, in August 1993, he told a DoD investigator that he last
used marijuana in 1988 and that he would not use it again (SOR ¶ 2.b). Applicant
admitted all of the SOR allegations without explanation or qualification. In addition to the
facts established by his admissions, I make the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 60 years old and is an engineer working for a defense contractor. His
area of expertise and principal interest is in the design and installation of visual flight
simulators. He has worked for his current employer since July 2007. He has worked for
defense contractors in the past, but most recently worked for companies outside this
arena in jobs that did not require a security clearance. When Applicant submitted his
current SF-86, he disclosed an extensive history of involvement with and use of illegal
drugs beginning around 1967 and continuing until at least 2006. As alleged and
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
admitted to in the SOR, the drug Applicant used, bought, sold, and possessed most
often was marijuana. However, he also used cocaine, LSD, hallucinogenic mushrooms,
cocaine, mescaline, quaaludes, amphetamines, and opium. In response to DOHA
interrogatories, Applicant stated that his “drug use has been experimental and
somewhat extensive over the years.” (Gx. 3)
Applicant previously held a security clearance from 1974 until 1989, and again in
the 1990s until 1998. (Tr. 42 - 43) Each time he has applied for a security clearance, he
has disclosed his drug use. However, when interviewed on at least two occasions (in
1977 and 1993) during prior background investigations, he stated that he understood
that involvement with illegal drugs could jeopardize his suitability for access to classified
information and that he did not intend to use drugs in the future. However, after each
such statement, Applicant resumed using illegal drugs. In some cases, he has used
drugs with which he had not experimented in several years. For example, Applicant
used cocaine in 1972, 1975 and 1977. Eight years later, in 1985, he decided to use it
again. There is a similar gap in his use of LSD. He used it in 1967 and 1968, then again
32 years later in 2000. (Gx. 2)
Applicant’s most recent use of illegal drugs occurred between 2003 and 2006. He
used drugs during this period in response to peer pressure. He was active in a social
group that was active in environmental issues in the western United States. Drug use
was very common among members of that group and they viewed with suspicion
people who did not at least smoke marijuana. (Gx. 2; Tr. 32 - 36)
Applicant has also bought and sold marijuana. He was arrested in 1968 and
charged with possession with intent to sell. However, his most recent transactions have
been among friends, consisting of small amounts for personal use. As to the allegation
that he sold marijuana in 2006, Applicant asserted that the sale price was $50 and that
he sold the marijuana to be rid of it.
Applicant avers that he has made lifestyle changes supportive of an intent to
refrain from future illegal drug use. Primarily, he insists that he has quit drinking heavily
and enjoys being sober. He feels he is healthier and more active as a result of not
smoking marijuana or taking other drugs. (Gx. 2; Tr. 28)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 24 (Guideline H - Drug
Involvement).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Drug Involvement
The government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual
allegations under Guideline H. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.j) Applicant began using, buying, selling,
5
and possessing illegal drugs around 1967, when he was about 18 years old. By his own
admission, his drug use has been “extensive over the years.” Although not specifically
alleged, Applicant’s testimony indicated that he used drugs in the 1970s and 1980s
while holding a security clearance through his work with defense contractors. The facts
established through the government’s information and through Applicant’s admissions
raise a security concern addressed in AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see definition [at AG ¶ 25(a)]) and AG
¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). AG ¶ 25(g) (any
illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance), and AG ¶ 25(h) (expressed
intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to
discontinue drug use).
By contrast, available information does not support application of any of the
mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 26. Given his lengthy history of frequent drug use
over the past 32 years, Applicant’s apparent abstinence from illegal drugs since 2006 is
insufficient to show that his drug use is not recent. Accordingly, the mitigating condition
at AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant claimed that he has made changes in his circumstances supportive of
a sober, drug-free lifestyle. However, in view of repeated failures to follow through on
statements to government investigators that he would no longer use drugs, despite
knowing that involvement with illegal drugs would jeopardize his suitability for a
clearance, he has not presented sufficient information to support his claim. The
mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
6
any violation) does not apply. In short, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security
concerns about his extensive history of involvement with illegal drugs.
Personal Conduct
A security concern may exist when, as stated in AG ¶ 15, available information
reflects
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The government alleged, and Applicant does not contest, that in two
subject interviews during prior background investigations, Applicant stated that
he would no longer use illegal drugs. After making one such statement in 1977,
he used cocaine at least once in 1985, and marijuana from 1985 until 1987.
When he was interviewed again in 1993, he stated that he last used marijuana in
1988 and would not use it again. However, he resumed using marijuana in 2001.
He also experimented thereafter with LSD and hallucinogenic mushrooms. In
both interviews, Applicant stated that he understood that using illegal drugs
would have an adverse impact on his suitability for a security clearance. 
The general security concern stated in AG ¶ 15 applies to Applicant’s
long-term involvement with illegal drugs, which he knew at all times to be criminal
conduct. He engaged in that conduct despite holding a security clearance, and
despite full awareness that such conduct is incompatible with the basic personnel
security program policies. Applicant’s conduct also requires application of the
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative).
Viewed together with all of the available information bearing on Applicant’s drug
use, Applicant deliberately tried to mislead the government about his past drug
use and about his intentions regarding future drug use. By contrast, Applicant
has presented no information that would support any of the mitigating conditions
listed at AG ¶ 17. On balance, he has failed to mitigate the security concerns
about his judgment and lack of candor.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and H. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant
used illegal drugs willingly and extensively for over 37 years. Although he is
presumed, at age 60, to be a mature and responsible adult, his conduct for most
of his life does not support that presumption. He knowingly and repeatedly
engaged in illegal conduct, at times while holding an active security clearance.
While he now claims he will no longer use drugs, similar claims in the past have
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 7, supra. 9
7
proved unreliable. A fair and commonsense  evaluation of this record shows it is8
highly probable that Applicant will use illegal drugs in the future, thus
perpetuating the doubts raised by the government’s information about his ability
or willingness to protect the government’s interests as his own. Because
protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such
doubts must be resolved for the government.9
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.j: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Request
for a security clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
