1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04296 
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 12, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On January 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
G and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant submitted an undated reply to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on May 5, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 15,
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 22, 2009, in Honolulu, Hawaii.
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were
also received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
August 6, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
2
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations 1.b, through 1.h., under
Guideline G, and 2.a. through  2.c., under Guideline E with explanations. He denied
1.a., and neither admitted nor denied 1.i., under Guideline G. The admitted allegations
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 42 years old. He is married, and he has two children. He served for
20 years in the United States Navy, and he received an Honorable Discharge. He is
employed as a system administrator by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD
security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption) 
The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has
engaged in excessive alcohol consumption. The following are the allegations that are
cited in the SOR:
1.a. Applicant is alleged to have “consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to
the point of intoxication, from approximately 1978 to about October 2007.” 
Applicant testified that he started consuming alcohol at age 12. His consumption
increased over time when he was under stress. In 2003 he was involved in motorcycle
accident which greatly increased his stress and caused increased binge drinking (Tr at
37-39). After he received treatment in April 2005, he abstained from consuming alcohol
completely until December 2006. Since he began drinking alcohol again, his
consumption has varied; but he estimated that in 2007 and 2008, he consumed alcohol
on average once a month, in the quantity of three rum and cokes each time. 
Applicant conceded that he has been diagnosed as alcohol dependent on two
occasions, and each time he was advised to abstain from any use of alcohol. He also
has been advised at the Alcoholics Anonymous meetings that he has attended, that he
should abstain from drinking alcohol. However, he testified that somebody in his
circumstances would eventually have a relapse and return to binge drinking if he
abstained completely, so he continues to consume alcohol (Tr at 36-37,49). He
indicated that he does have some “safety implementations” including never going out by
himself, always making sure that he has a method to get to his home, and not
consuming more than three drinks in one night or more than one drink in an hour (Tr at
50). 
1.b. On August 31, 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving
While Intoxicated (DWI). His license was suspended for one year.  This was as a result
of a single vehicle accident in which Applicant was involved, and which resulted in him
being hospitalized. 
3
1.c. In 1998, Applicant was diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent when he received
counseling after a self-referral at an alcohol abuse center in Japan (Tr at 78).
1.d. In February or March 2000, Applicant received substance abuse related
outpatient treatment including group counseling sessions and required attendance at
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. This occurred after Applicant became intoxicated
during one night and did not appear for duty the next day. At these sessions, Applicant
was advised to abstain completely from alcohol consumption, and Applicant testified
that he followed the abstention instructions until 2005 (Tr at 80-82).
1.e. On February 17, 2005, Applicant was involved in an alcohol related incident.
Applicant explained that he had consumed alcohol from approximately 6 p.m. until 5
a.m. the next day, during which he had consumed at least 12 alcoholic drinks. He
thereafter appeared at his place of employment intoxicated (Tr at 44-45). 
1.f. On March 10, 2005, Applicant was involved in an additional alcohol related
incident. Applicant testified that less than one month after the incident occurred,
described in 1.e., above, he was involved with a second almost identical incident (Tr at
46). 
1.g. On March 10, 2005, While still in the Navy, Applicant was diagnosed as
Alcohol Dependent by a medical doctor (Exhibit 4).
1.h. On May 2, 2005, to May 30, 2005, Applicant received inpatient treatment at
a Naval Medical Center substance abuse rehabilitation program where he was also
diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent. The recommendations he received there included
receiving weekly counseling, attending meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous, and
abstaining completely from alcohol consumption. 
1.i. On November 20, 2008, Applicant underwent an alcoholic evaluation by a
substance abuse counselor for a condition diagnosed as Alcohol Dependence in full
remission. On Exhibit 2,  interrogatories propounded to Applicant, there is a statement
from a certified substance abuse counselor which states that Applicant “has been
abstinent since April 2005 without any problems.” During his testimony, Applicant
claimed that this counselor had asked him if he had any problems and Applicant replied
“no, I have not had any problems.” Applicant claimed that the counselor assumed
Applicant meant that he was not consuming any alcohol, although Applicant contended
that he did not actually tell him that he was not consuming alcohol, but he did not
correct the counselor’s misunderstanding (Tr at 54).
I do not find it credible that Applicant was not specifically asked by the substance
abuse counselor if he was still consuming alcohol, but even if Applicant’s explanation is
true, Applicant knew he was leaving the counselor with an incorrect understanding of
his alcohol consumption history, and he knowingly did not correct it.  
4
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he furnished untruthful information to the Government and exhibited
questionable judgement. 
2.a. In or about February 2004, while in the Navy, Applicant was charged with
Unauthorized Absence and Failure to Obey an Order/Regulation. He was reduced in
rank to an E5. Applicant testified that this event occurred because he left his duty
station to help a friend without authorization (Tr at 51).  
       
2.b. Applicant furnished interrogatory responses to the Government on August 1,
2008 (Exhibit 3), in which he indicated that he last consumed alcohol in April 2005. In
fact, as reviewed above, Applicant began consuming alcohol again in 2006, and has
continued to consume alcohol continuously, at times on a one time a month basis, from
2006 until the present. There is no reasonable explanation for Applicant’s failure to
identify that he is still consuming alcohol. 
2.c. Applicant completed a signed, sworn Security Clearance Application (SCA)
on March 20, 2007 (Exhibit 1). He answered a series of questions under Section 23,
regarding his police record. Question d asks “Have you ever been charged with or
convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered “No.” The
Government alleges that Applicant’s deliberately failed to list his August 31, 2006 DWI
arrest, as set forth in 1.b., above. In his testimony, Applicant claimed that he did not
realize that he had been arrested since he was simply given a ticket at the hospital, and
then Applicant went to traffic court, where he had his license suspended. I  f i n d  t h a t
Applicant knew or should have known that he was charged with an alcohol related
offense, since he had to appear in court for his alcohol related accident, and this
resulted in his driver’s license being revoked for one year. 
Mitigation
In an attempt to offer mitigating evidence, Applicant submitted a number of
documents including his DD Form 214, which confirmed his long and successful career
in the Navy and his Honorable Discharge separation (Exhibit A), nine Certificates of
Appreciation and Merit (Exhibit B), eight extremely laudatory letters of recommendation
(Exhibit C), and Applicant’s 2008 Annual Appraisal which was consistently positive
(Exhibit D).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption
The Government has established that Applicant's alcohol consumption has
resulted in a series of alcohol related problems, including: one DWI conviction occurring
in 1996, appearing at his employment site on at least two occasions while intoxicated in
2005, receiving alcohol related treatment in 2000 and 2005, being diagnosed as alcohol
dependant by at least two different experts, continuing to consume alcohol until the
present despite being advised by different experts that he should abstain completely,
6
and finally, supplying untruthful information about his alcohol consumption to a
substance abuse counselor and to the Government.
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 22. (a), (b), (c), and (e) apply to this case, because
Applicant was involved in alcohol-related incidents away from work and at work, binge
alcohol consumption to the point of impaired judgement, and diagnosis by a duly
qualified medical professional of alcohol dependence.   
As stated above, Applicant admitted to currently drinking, despite all the advice to
the contrary. I do not find that any Mitigating Condition (MC) applies. Paragraph 1 is
found against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the Government relies heavily on the honesty and
integrity of individuals seeking access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual
intentionally falsifies material facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a
Government investigator, it is extremely difficult to conclude that he nevertheless
possesses the judgment, and honesty necessary for an individual given a clearance. 
In this case, I conclude that Applicant knowingly and wilfully furnished untruthful
information to the Government regarding his alcohol usage in interrogatory responses to
the Government on August 1, 2008 (Exhibit 3), and in a sworn SCA on March 20, 2007
(Exhibit 1). He also was untruthful to a substance abuse counselor that was evaluating
him for the Government.
In reviewing the DC under Guideline E, I conclude that DC 16. (a) and (b) apply. I
do not find that any MC applies to this case.  Applicant has not mitigated this allegation.
I resolve Guideline E against Applicant. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines G and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply
and the Mitigating Conditions do not, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
