                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05222 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
D, Sexual Behavior, E, Personal Conduct, and J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
D, Sexual Behavior, E, Personal Conduct, and J, Criminal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 18, 2009, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on July 21, 2009. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on July 22, 2009, and it was received on July 28, 2009. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on 
October 8, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old engineer who has held a Secret security clearance 
since 1989, and he briefly held a Top Secret security clearance in 2000. In late 2006, as 
part of the background investigation process to be considered for access to Sensitive 
Compartment Information (SCI), Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator.   
 
 During his interview, Applicant admitted viewing pornography since he was a 
child. He intentionally searched for and accessed child pornography online a couple of 
times per week from the mid 1990s to at least September 2006. The frequency varied. 
At times he viewed it every night and then stopped for awhile. He stopped because he 
felt guilty about his conduct and he feared legal repercussions. He was concerned that it 
would put his security clearance in jeopardy and would make him vulnerable if his 
actions were known.1  
 
 Applicant visited online newsgroups and Usenet sites that contained 
pornographic images featuring children. He specifically searched these sites for child 
pornography. He was cautious about searching the World Wide Web, and did so only 
occasionally, because it was more risky.2  
 
 Applicant “burned” up to 1,000 CD’s and DVD’s containing exclusively graphic 
still photos and videos depicting sexually explicitly images of children and adults 
engaged in sexual activity. Applicant collected images of children as young as infants 
and as old as 17. He intentionally sought out “hardcore” pornographic images of 
children. Applicant masturbated when viewing child pornography.3  
 
1 Items 6, 7. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In September 2006, after his background interview, Applicant made a decision to 
stop viewing child pornography. He admits to being tempted, but diverts himself to adult 
pornography.4  
 
 Applicant met with a psychologist five times from September 2006 to November 
2006, to discuss his pornography addiction. His psychologist wanted him to give up all 
forms of pornography, but he was reluctant because it was his lone outlet for sexual 
release. He was referred to another psychologist. He did not contact this psychologist 
until March 2007, because he wanted to see if he could stop the behavior on his own. 
His behavior decreased, but he could not stop it, so he contacted the psychologist. He 
attends sex addicts anonymous (SAA). He realizes he has a problem with viewing 
pornography. He intends to continue attending SAA and seeing his psychologist. He 
has not disclosed his pornography addiction to his family, friends, or coworkers.5  
 
 Since January 2007, Applicant avoids situations where he is alone with a child 
and situations that might tempt him to act out.6  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior:  
 
Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶13 that could 
raise a security concern and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; and 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Appellant has been viewing and collecting child pornography since the mid-
1990s until September 2006. Possession of child pornography is illegal. His behavior 
occurred several times a week and sometimes daily, indicating a pattern of compulsive 
and self-destructive behavior. He attempted to stop but was unable. He has sought 
assistance from a psychologist. He is aware that his conduct is illegal and is concerned 
about the legal ramifications and security concerns. His family, friends, and coworkers 
are unaware of his conduct, which makes him vulnerable to coercion. I find all of the 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶14. I have especially 
considered the following:  
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.  
 
After considering all of the evidence, I find none of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶16 that could raise 
a security concern and have especially considered the following: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant viewed and collected explicit and graphic child pornography. His 
conduct began in the mid-1990s and continued until at least September 2006. He 
sometimes masturbated while viewing the child pornography. None of his family or 
friends are aware of his conduct. He admitted that his behavior makes him vulnerable to 
legal action. I find the above disqualifying condition applies.  
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶17 
including: 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 Applicant has sought counseling from a psychologist and attends SAA to help 
change his behavior. He has been viewing and collecting “hardcore” child pornography 
for years. He did not seek counseling until he became aware that his security clearance 
was in jeopardy. No information was provided about the progress of his recovery. No 
information was provided regarding the diagnosis or prognosis about his apparent 
addiction. Based on the evidence, I conclude his actions are likely to recur. Applicant’s 
actions are illegal and potentially subject to prosecution. His family, friends, and 
coworkers are unaware of his conduct. He is concerned about his behavior becoming 
public. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has been viewing and collecting, including “burning” CDs and DVDs, of 
graphic, sexually explicit, child pornography since the mid-1990s. His actions are illegal 
and subject to prosecution.  
 
7 
 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in the record and conclude none of the 
above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has held a security 
clearance since 1989. He has been viewing pornography since he was young. In the 
mid 1990s he began viewing, downloading, and copying on to CDs and DVDs sexually 
explicit child pornography. It is illegal to possess child pornography and Applicant is 
 
8 
 
 
potentially subject to criminal prosecution. He is concerned about the legal ramifications 
of his actions. His family, friends, and coworkers are unaware of his conduct. He sought 
counseling after he was interviewed by the government and learned that his behavior 
became a security issue. Viewing adult pornography is not illegal. It is not disqualifying 
to make a decision to stop viewing child pornography or to seek assistance from a 
psychologist or avoid situations that might be tempting. Therefore, I find for Applicant on 
these allegations. Applicant failed to provide any independent evidence to corroborate 
his assertions that he is in therapy or that he has control over his sexual addiction. He 
has a long history of illegal sexual behavior. There is significant potential for 
vulnerability, coercion, and exploitation. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions about Appellant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Appellant has failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guidelines for Sexual Behavior, Personal Conduct, and Criminal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
