                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02715
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Robert R. Bohn, Attorney At Law 
November 24, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on January 25, 2007.  On November 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines C and B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on February 23, 2009, and she requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was originally assigned to
another Administrative Judge on May 15, 2009.  It was transferred to the undersigned
on June 9, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 16, 2009, scheduling the
hearing for July 14, 2009.  At the hearing the Government presented two exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2.  The Applicant presented eighteen exhibits,
2
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through R, and testified on his own behalf.  The
record remained open until close of business on July 21, 2009, to allow the Applicant
the opportunity to substitute signed documents  in lieu of the unsigned documents that
were admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits B, C and D.  The Applicant
submitted said documents.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on July 23, 2009.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Lebanon.  The Applicant and
her counsel had no objection.  (Tr. p. 14).  The request and the attached documents
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 25 years of age and has a Master’s Degree
in Engineering Management, and a Master’s Degree in Logistics and Supply Chain
Management.  She is employed as a Systems Engineer for a defense contractor.  She
seeks a security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in the United States in 1984, and is a United States
citizen.  Her father, who is of Lebanese decent, is a Lebanese citizen by virtue of his
birth, and thus, the Applicant is also a Lebanese citizen.  The Applicant considers
herself only an American.  (Tr. p. 57).  Shortly after her birth, her family moved to
Lebanon where she grew up a Christian speaking English, Arabic, and a little French at
home.  In 2005, she moved back to the United States to attend college, where she
obtained two Master’s degrees and excelled academically.  (Applicant’s Exhibits E and
F).  Since then, she has made the United States her permanent home.  In 2006, she
began working for the defense industry. 
Her father, a 62 year old citizen of Lebanon, after thirty years, retired in 1997, as
a General in the Lebanese Army.  He currently receives a military pension of $2,000
monthly from the Lebanese government and owns two small houses in Lebanon.
Applicant stated that if he died, she would not take any inheritance from her father. She
does not want it to become a security concern.  (Tr. p. 87-88).  On a monthly to annual
basis, her father has lunch with other retired generals.  One of them is an important
3
person in Lebanon.  (Tr. p. 92).  Her father has no other contact with any other military
or government officials of Lebanon.  
Applicant’s father has had a United States green card for about ten years and is
trying to become a United States citizen.  (Tr. p. 63).  He is currently visiting the
Applicant in the United States, and staying with her.  When he is not visiting in the
United States, the Applicant telephones her father about once every other week or so.
(Tr. p. 67).  Applicant’s father is aware of the fact that the Applicant is undergoing a
security clearance investigation.  (Tr. p. 112).  Applicant states that she understands her
responsibilities to the DoD, while holding a security clearance, and her relationship with
her father will never jeopardize it.  
The Applicant’s 34 year old brother was born in Lebanon, and is a dual citizen of
Lebanon and the United States.  In 2009, he became a naturalized United States citizen
and moved to the United States.  He resides in the United States with the Applicant’s
mother.  The Applicant communicates with him about once a month or so.  (Tr. p. 68).  
The Applicant’s 31 year old sister is also a citizen of Lebanon.  She has had a
United States green card for about ten years and is trying to become a United States
citizen.  (Tr. p. 70).  Her sister resides in the United States and is currently unemployed.
Applicant sees her about twice a week. 
The Applicant’s mother and her maternal grandmother are United States citizens
and reside in the United States.  Since 2002, Applicant’s mother has been living in the
United States and works as a teacher.    
Applicant testified that she has family on her father’s side, including uncles,
aunts, grandmother, cousins, nephews and nieces, in Lebanon.  Her only
communication with them is when she visits there.  Only the Applicant’s parents know
that she has applied for a security clearance, but they do not know any of the details.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
The Applicant had an identification card, issued by Lebanon in February 2000,
when she was sixteen years old.  (Applicant’s Exhibit O).  She has never held a
Lebanese passport and does not want one.  She testified that since moving to the
United States, she has traveled to Lebanon every year for Christmas.  (Tr. p. 104).
During these trips, she used her United States passport (Applicant’s Exhibit N), and her
Lebanese identification card.  
When the Applicant learned that her Lebanese identification card was raising
some security concerns, on July 13, 2009, she destroyed it in front of the company’s in-
house counsel.  A declaration from counsel confirms this.  (Applicant’s Exhibit R).  The
Applicant has no intentions of renewing it.  (Tr. p. 73).  Applicant also has a Lebanese
4
drivers license that she got when she was eighteen that she does not use.  (Tr. p. 118).
She is willing to renounce her Lebanese citizenship.  (Tr. p. 81).
  
The Applicant testified that she has always complied with security policy and
procedure of her company, and has gone above and beyond its requirements.  She
stated that before any of her travel to Lebanon in the past, she consulted with her
company security department.  She told them specifically where she was going, who
she would be in contact with, as well as her intent and duration of the trip.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit L).  Since it has raised a security concern, she will no longer travel to Lebanon.
(Tr. p. 86). 
   
The Applicant has not yet voted in an American election, primarily because she
has been in school.  She plans to vote in the future.  She voted once in a Lebanese
election in 2002 or 2003 during a visit to Lebanon.  Other than that, she has never
exercised any rights, privileges, or obligation or duties associated with her Lebanese
citizenship.  She has no financial holdings of any sort in Lebanon.  None of her college
education was paid for by the Lebanese government.  She has a checking account and
a 401(k) retirement account in the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibits P and Q).
The Applicant stated that if there were a conflict between the United States and
Lebanon, she would, without question, place her loyalty with the United States.  If
someone contacted her and threatened to harm her family if she did not provide details
of her job or sensitive information about the United States, she will not cooperate under
any circumstances.  (Tr. p. 93 - 94).  She would immediately report this activity to her
security department.  She has no intentions of ever returning to Lebanon.       
Applicant’s performance evaluations for 2006, 2007, and 2008 reflect either that
she “exceeds expectations” or “far exceeds expectations” in every category.
(Applicant’s Exhibits A, B, and C).
Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s direct manager, and various
professional associates and coworkers, attest to the Applicant’s hard working nature
and reliability. She is considered to be an excellent employee.  She is driven, dedicated
and committed to her work.  She is said to be very conscientious and cognizant of
security related procedures and policies, and always complies with rules and
regulations.  She is intelligent and demonstrates great leadership qualities.  She has
technical, management and communication skills.  She is open, honest and trustworthy.
(Applicant’s Exhibits G, H, I, and J).  Applicant has received various certificates and
awards for her service with her employer.  (Applicant’s Exhibit M).
The Applicant has contacts with Lebanon.  Accordingly, it is appropriate to
discuss the relationship between Lebanon and the United States at this time.  I take
administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Lebanon.  Lebanon is a
parliamentary republic that became independent in November 1943.  The U.S. policy is
to maintain its traditional close ties with Lebanon and to help preserve its independence,
sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity.  Since its independence, Lebanon’s
national policy has been determined by a small group of regional and sectarian leaders.
5
Political institutions often play a secondary role to religion and personality-based
politics.  Lebanon has been in a state of war with Israel since 1973.  Civil war broke out
in April 1975, and did not end until 1991.  Since 1992, Lebanon has experienced social
and political instability, economic uncertainty, lack of infrastructure, violent clashes with
Israeli forces and political assassinations. 
I also take administrative notice that Lebanon’s foreign policy and internal
policies are heavily influenced by Syria, which maintains intelligence agents in Lebanon
and is a state sponsor of terrorism.  The unstable political situation in Lebanon enables
foreign terrorist organizations to operate within its borders.  Hezbollah is the most
prominent terrorist group in Lebanon, and it has been designed by the U.S. Department
of State as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.”  The Lebanese government recognizes
Hezbollah as a legitimate resistance group and political party.  Hezbollah maintains
offices in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, is closely allied with Iran, supports a variety
of violent anti-Western groups, and has been involved in numerous anti-U.S. terrorist
attacks.  Hezbollah seeks to obtain U.S. technology, has been involved in several
efforts to obtain restricted, dual-use technology, and is considered by the U.S. to be the
most technically capable terrorist groups in the world.  A center for Hezbollah and
Syrian activity is in the Bekaa Valley.
Finally, I take administrative notice that Lebanon has a poor human rights record
and has been ineffective in controlling terrorism and political violence.  Lebanese
security forces have engaged in arbitrary arrest, murder, torture, and other abuses.
There is an atmosphere of governmental corruption and lack of transparency.  Militias
and non-Lebanese forces operating outside the area of Lebanese central government
authority have used informers and monitored telephones to obtain information about
their perceived adversaries.  Ongoing political violence and terrorism directed at
Americans and U.S. interests make Lebanon dangerous for U.S. citizens.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern, which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
6
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or he may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
11.  (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign
country;
7
11.  (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h.  The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress, and 
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
8
The Government must make out a case under Guideline C (foreign preference),
and Guideline B (foreign influence) that establishes doubt about a person's judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness.  While a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown
between Applicant's adverse conduct and her ability to effectively safeguard classified
information, with respect to sufficiency of proof of a rational connection, objective or
direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign preference and has foreign
connections may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign identification card
raises legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place
the interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government
must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to
abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  Mitigating
Conditions 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which theses persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government
and the interests of the U.S. and 8.(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is
so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation applies.
It is noted that the current political situation in Lebanon elevates the cause for
concern in this case.  The evidence shows that the Applicant, a native born United
States citizen, has various family members, including a father, who is a citizen and
resident of Lebanon.  Although she maintains contact with her father in Lebanon, the
nature of the contact does not pose a security risk.  Admittedly, her father, who is a
retired General in the Lebanese Army, has periodic lunches with other retired generals,
one of is an important person in Lebanon.  However, these visits are casual and social
9
and nothing more.  On her own volition, the Applicant offered evidence of her father’s
luncheon associate, who was at one time a retired general.  The Government did not
have this evidence, nor did the Applicant seek to hide it when she knew it could be
jeopardizing her chances of obtaining a security clearance.  
The Applicant has been honest, credible, and forthright, and fully understands
her responsibilities to the United States while holding a security clearance.  She does
not discuss her work with her family or anyone else in Lebanon, and most do not know
that she works for a defense contractor.  She is conscientious and meticulous about
how she reports her foreign contacts and understands the importance of doing so.  In
addition, her father is trying to become a United States citizen and desires to move to
the United States.  Under the particular facts of this case, the possibility of foreign
influence does not exist, nor could it create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to
foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member applies.  However, Mitigation Conditions 11(a)
dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country, and
11(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship apply.
Although the Applicant is by birth, a dual citizen of Lebanon and the United
States, she considers herself to be only an American.  She destroyed her Lebanese
identification card and is willing to formally renounced her Lebanese citizenship.  Except
for her father, who is waiting to become a naturalized United States citizen, she has
essentially cut all ties to the country of Lebanon.  Under the circumstances of this case,
I find for the Applicant under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). 
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guidelines B and C of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the
Directive.  Accordingly, she has met her ultimate burden of persuasion under Guidelines
B and C.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: For the Applicant
10
Subpara. 1.c.: For the Applicant
 Subpara. 1.d.: For the Applicant
 Subpara. 1.e.: For the Applicant
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 2.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 2.b.: For the Applicant
 
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
