 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04990 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  John D. Altenburg, Jr., Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Foreign  
Influence adjudicative guideline.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 16, 2006, Applicant signed and certified a security clearance 
application (SF-86). On December 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On January 14, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before a DOHA administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2009. I 
convened a hearing on August 26, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses, introduced five exhibits (Ex. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5), and 
offered facts found in nine official U.S. Government documents for administrative notice. 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.) The Government’s exhibits were admitted without objection. I 
took administrative notice of HE I. Applicant testified on this own behalf and called two 
witnesses. At the hearing, he introduced three exhibits, which were identified as Ex. A, 
B, and C and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on September 3, 2009. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG B, Foreign 
Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 
four allegations and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and a native-born U.S. citizen. He is married and the 
father of an adult son who is 32 years old. Applicant seeks a security clearance as a 
civilian government contractor. In 2003, he retired after 30 years of military service with 
a distinguished record in security and criminal investigations that included numerous 
high-level commendations, awards, and certificates of appreciation. In 2005, he was 
diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease.  (Ex. 1; Ex. A; Tr. 43-91, 112.)  
 
 Applicant was first granted a security clearance in 1970. He held a security 
clearance without incident until 2002. In 2002, his eligibility for access to a higher level  
clearance was revoked because of security concerns related to his son’s wife’s 
nationality and family connections and the country where his son now resides. Applicant 
retired from military service in 2003.  (Ex. 1 at 9; Ex. 5; Tr. 33-38, 137-138.) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant learned that his son was romantically involved with a Russian 
woman. The son and the woman met as graduate students at a U.S. university. They 
were married in a civil ceremony in the United States in October 1999. Applicant and his 
wife strongly disapproved of the marriage, and they did not attend the civil ceremony. 
They felt that their son had deceived them about his relationship with the Russian 
woman.  (Ex. A: son’s statement; Tr. 115-117.)   
  
 Applicant’s daughter-in-law is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is also a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. The daughter-in-law’s father is a retired high-level officer in a 
Russian military intelligence organization, who worked to undermine U.S. security 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
interests by “managing” or “handling” individuals who divulged U.S. classified 
information to the Russians.  (Ex. A: daughter-in-law’s statement; Tr. 119-121, 126.) 
 
 Applicant’s son and his wife have two young children, one born in the United 
States in 2000, and the other born in Russia in 2006. Both children are dual citizens of 
the United States and Russia. Applicant’s son and daughter-in-law reside in Russia with 
their two children. The older grandson attends a Russian elementary school. Applicant’s 
son and his family live in the same neighborhood as Applicant’s daughter-in-law’s father 
and mother. Applicant’s son resides in Russia under a visa granted to him by the 
Russian Government. (Ex. A: son’s statement; Ex. A: daughter-in-law’s statement; Ex. B 
at 7; Tr. 139-140, 152-159.)   
 
 In the summer of 2000, Applicant’s son and daughter-in-law traveled to Russia to 
marry in a religious ceremony, to visit her family, and to introduce them to their newborn 
son. Applicant, who was serving in the U.S. military, traveled to Russia on personal 
leave to witness the religious ceremony uniting his son and his daughter-in-law in 
marriage. Applicant’s wife, who is estranged from their son, did not join him in the 
Russian trip, and she did not attend the wedding. Applicant informed his chain of 
command of the trip and complied with all U.S. government foreign travel reporting 
requirements.  (Ex. A: son’s statement; Ex. A: daughter-in-law’s statement; Tr. 115-117, 
151.) 
 
 While in Russia in 2000, Applicant elected not to stay in a hotel, but instead 
stayed in the apartment and vacation home of his daughter-in-law’s father, who had 
retired from his government position in 1991.1 In his retirement, the daughter-in-law’s 
father owns a security business in Russia. While Applicant was a guest of his daughter-
in-law’s parents, their vacation home burned. Arson was not the cause of the fire. 
Although they had originally planned to return to the United States after the religious 
ceremony, Applicant’s son and daughter-in-law decided to remain in Russia to provide 
moral support to her parents. Applicant’s son obtained a job with a U.S. government 
entity in Russia.2 (Ex. A: daughter-in-law’s statement; Tr.117-119, 121, 147-148.) 
 
 Applicant’s son, daughter-in-law, and older grandson came to the United States 
in the summer of 2006 so that the daughter-in-law could take part in a naturalization 
hearing as a part of her application for U.S. citizenship.3 Applicant saw his son and his 
 
1 Applicant reported that during this time, he was also a dinner guest at the vacation home of a friend of 
his daughter-in-law’s parents. The family friend had also served in high-level security and diplomatic 
positions for the former Soviet government. (Ex. 5 at 6.) 
 
2Later, when the identity of the son’s father-in-law became clear, he was terminated from this job. He now 
works for a private European company in Russia. (Tr. 128-132.) 
 
3 Applicant’s son’s wife received U.S. citizenship under a program for spouses of U.S. government 
employees working outside the United States. (Ex. A at 21.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
family at that time, but his wife did not. Applicant’s son and his family have not been in 
the United States since that visit. (Ex. B at 1;Tr. 154-159.)  
 
  Applicant also traveled alone to Russia in 2007 and 2008 to visit his son and his 
family. Applicant’s son, his wife, and their children reside at certain times with her 
parents in the parents’ vacation house. During his 2007 visit, Applicant stayed in his 
son’s apartment and was a guest for several days at his daughter-in-law’s father’s 
vacation house. When he returned to the United States, Applicant reported his activities 
and complied with all U.S. government reporting requirements. Applicant’s wife, who 
remains estranged from their son, did not accompany Applicant on these trips. (Ex. B at 
7; Tr. 112-113, 158.) 
 
 Applicant sees himself as the significant familial link with his son. When his son 
was newly married and still in graduate school, he needed money. Applicant did not 
want his son to turn to his Russian father-in-law for financial support, so he took 
approximately $17,000 from his 401(k) plan and gave it to his son. (Tr. 107-108, 151-
158.) 
 
 Applicant speaks with his son by telephone about twice a month. He does not 
speak with his grandchildren because they do not speak English well. Their first 
language is Russian. (Tr. 113.)  
 
 Applicant does not send money to his son in Russia. Applicant owns no property 
in Russia, and he has no accounts with Russian banks. He describes his relationship 
with his son’s father-in-law as that of “[t]wo proud grandfathers.” (Ex. B at 8;  Tr. 113-
114.) 
 
 Two retired generals who had worked closely with Applicant when he was a 
military investigator testified credibly on his behalf. They praised his skill, leadership 
ability, managerial expertise, and unblemished patriotism. They recommended that he 
be granted a security clearance, as did a third general who provided a letter of character 
reference for Applicant. (Ex. A; Tr. 46-84.) 
 
 At the time of his hearing, Applicant was not employed. He was dismissed by his 
previous employer after he fell in the workplace and his employer concluded that his 
Parkinson’s disease was making it difficult for him to carry out his job safely. However, 
the government contractor that sponsored his application for a security clearance 
continued to sponsor his application. (Tr. 135-137.)  
 
   I take administrative notice of the following facts about Russia, which appear in 
official U.S. government publications: 
 
 The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
mutual interest to the United States and Russia are counterterrorism and the reduction 
of strategic arsenals.  Russia and the United States share a common interest in 
controlling the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver 
 
5 
 
 
them.  The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CRT) program was launched in 1992 to 
provide for the dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction in the former Soviet 
Union. The CRT program was renewed in 2006 for seven years, until 2013. (HE I: 
Background Note: Russia, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department 
of State, April 2009, at 13.) 
 
 Since 2003, U.S.-Russian relations have often been strained. Tensions between 
the United States and Russia increased in August 2008 when Russia sent its army 
across an internationally recognized boundary in an attempt to change by force the 
borders of Georgia, a country with a democratically-elected government. Russia’s 
assault on Georgia followed other troubling signs: threats against Poland, including the 
threat of nuclear attack; suspicious poisonings and killings of journalists and those 
deemed “undesirable,” including the President of Ukraine; the apparent use of energy to 
apply political pressure against Ukraine, Lithuania, and the Czech Republic; and the 
creation in Russia’s state-controlled media of an “enemy image” of the United States. 
(HE I: Summary at 2.)    
 
 Since at least 1997, Russia has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought to 
obtain protected information from them through industrial espionage. Russian 
espionage specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. (HE I: 
Summary at 3.) 
 
 In addition to its technology collection and espionage activities against the United 
States, Russia supports missile programs and nuclear and biotechnology projects in 
other countries. Russia has provided missile technology to China, Iran, Syria, and 
Venezuela. These technologies can be used in the construction of weapons of mass 
destruction.  Despite U.S. concerns, Russia has refused to cease constructing nuclear 
reactors in Iran. (HE I: Summary at 3.) 
 
 Russia’s internal problems include terrorism and a poor human rights record.  
The U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens of safety concerns related to 
travel in Russia.  (HE I: Summary at 4.) 
 
 The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct warrantless searches of residences and other premises and 
electronic surveillance without judicial permission. This surveillance includes Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic.  
Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access to the personal 
information of users of telephone and cell phone services.  (HE I: Summary at 5.) 
      
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
6 
 
 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A Guideline B decision concerning Russia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Russia, as well as the dangers existing in Russia. Russia is a 
diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States in some areas where both 
countries have mutual interests. For example, Russia is a key partner in efforts to 
reduce proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and control of nuclear materials.   
However, Russia is also one of the world’s most aggressive nations in the collection of 
U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic information. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(i).4  
 
 The United States is a primary intelligence target of Russia. American citizens 
with immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Russia could be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 Applicant’s only child is married to a Russian citizen and has resided in Russia 
with her for the past nine years. The couple has two young children who also reside in 
Russia and are dual citizens of Russia and the United States. In order to reside and 
 
4 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 17(i) reads: “conduct, especially 
while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by a foreign person, group, government, or country.”  
 
8 
 
 
work in Russia, Applicant’s son relies on a visa granted him by the Russian 
government. 
 
Applicant’s son’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Russia. They live near Applicant’s son’s family in Russia. Applicant’s son sees his 
father-in-law and mother-in-law frequently. The father-in-law is retired and owns a 
security company in Russia. During his career before retirement, he carried out high- 
level intelligence work against the United States for the Russian government. 
Applicant’s son shares his home with his wife, who has close familial relationships with 
her father and mother. 
 
In 2000, 2007, and 2008, Applicant traveled to visit his son and his family in 
Russia. During at least two of these visits, Applicant elected to stay in his son’s father-
in-law’s home and had friendly familial contacts with him. These facts raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(i). 
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. 
Government business or are approved by the cognizant security authority,” then AG ¶ 
8(d) might apply. If the “individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country,” then AG ¶ 8(e) might apply. 
  
In 1999, Applicant, who had devoted his career in the U.S. military to intelligence 
and investigations, learned that his only child was involved in a romantic relationship 
with and planned to marry the daughter of a retired high-level Russian intelligence 
officer who had worked to undermine U.S. security interests. Applicant and his wife 
were deeply opposed to their son’s marriage to the Russian woman. As an expression 
of their opposition and lack of support, they did not attend the couple’s civil marriage 
ceremony, which was held in the United States. 
 
In July 2000, Applicant’s son, his Russian wife, and their infant son traveled to 
Russia to visit the wife’s parents and to take part in a religious ceremony celebrating 
their marriage. Applicant and his wife were invited to attend the ceremony in Russia. 
Applicant’s wife, who was and continues to be estranged from the son, did not attend. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant took personal leave from his active duty military responsibilities and traveled 
alone to Russia to meet his son’s parents-in-law and to attend the couple’s religious 
marriage ceremony. While in Russia, he elected not to reside in a hotel but to accept 
the bride’s family’s invitation to reside with them in their apartment and in their vacation 
home. Additionally, he joined the family in dining with a former Russian intelligence and 
diplomatic agent who was their friend. He complied with all security requirements for 
reporting his trip and foreign contacts.  
 
Applicant sees himself as the only familial link with his son and grandchildren. He 
is a loving, loyal, and devoted father and grandfather. He speaks with his son by 
telephone about twice a month. He is unable to speak with his grandchildren because 
their first language is Russian and they know little English. In 2007 and 2008, while 
employed as a government contractor, he took personal leave and traveled alone to 
Russia to visit his son and his family. In 2007, he again resided in his son’s father-in-
law’s vacation home with his son, the son’s wife, his grandchildren, and his son’s 
parents-in-law. Despite the father-in-law’s past history of taking actions that seriously 
threatened U.S. security, Applicant described his relationship with his son’s father-in-law 
as that of “two proud grandfathers.” Applicant complied with all security requirements for 
reporting his trip and foreign contacts. 
 
Applicant’s contacts with his son are not casual or infrequent. To the contrary, 
they are frequent, intense, and familial. His relationship with his son’s Russian father-in-
law is intense, risk-laden, and familial; it is framed by an awareness that the father-in-
law carried out espionage against the United States, and Applicant knows that he and 
the Russian hold opposing views on the nature and role of government. At the same 
time, they are grandfathers to the same children. This relationship raises a concern that 
Applicant could be targeted for exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the government of 
Russia in ways that might also threaten U.S. security interests. Moreover, even though 
Applicant has been described by credible witnesses as a man who has demonstrated 
over a long period of time unquestionable loyalty and patriotism, the facts of this case 
raise conflict of interest concerns that go to the heart of family loyalties and the parent-
child relationship so compellingly that it is not possible to conclude that Applicant can be 
expected to resolve such conflicts in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant was forthright, prompt, and candid in complying with existing agency 
security requirements for reporting his Russian contacts when he traveled to visit his 
son and his family in Russia. I conclude that AG ¶ 8 (e) applies to the facts of his case. 
  
However, Applicant failed to rebut the Government’s allegations that his contacts 
with his son, a resident of Russia,  his daughter-in-law, a citizen and resident of Russia, 
and his son’s father-in-law, a resident and citizen of Russia and a former high-level 
Russian intelligence agent, created a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant’s contacts and relationships 
with these individuals could force him to choose between loyalty to his son and 
grandchildren and the security interests of the United States. (ISCR Case No. 03-15485 
at 4-6 (App. Bd. June 2, 2005); ISCR Case No. 06-24575 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007))  I 
 
10 
 
 
conclude that the mitigating conditions identified under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(d) 
do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and a mature adult of 61 years of age. He had an 
exemplary military career and served his country with great distinction. After he retired, 
he was stricken with a debilitating illness. Even so, he continued in his efforts to use his 
experience, skills, and knowledge to serve his country, and he sought a security 
clearance as a government contractor. 
 
Applicant is also a parent, and he is devoted to his only child, a son who is now  
32 years old, married, living in Russia, and the father of two small children. In 1999, the 
son became romantically involved with a Russian citizen whose father, also a Russian 
citizen, had carried out certain intelligence actions that undermined U.S. security 
interests. Applicant and his wife vigorously opposed the match, but the son married the 
woman and moved to Russia to live with her and their children in the orbit of the wife’s 
father. It was a choice that appeared to stand in direct opposition to Applicant’s 30 years 
of honorable and patriotic service in the U.S. military.    
 
 
11 
 
 
Throughout history, a father’s conduct and choices have sometimes adversely 
affected the lives of his children. This case reverses the historical pattern. Whether 
intended or not, the choices made by Applicant’s son have not only limited his father’s 
career but they have also increased his vulnerability and his father’s vulnerability to 
pressure or coercion by an aggressive foreign government that targets U.S. security 
interests. Applicant’s actions to maintain close contact with his son, to travel to Russia 
to visit him, to reside with him in Russia, and to accept the possibly compromising 
hospitality of his son’s father-in-law raise serious unmitigated security concerns about 
his vulnerability to coercion, even as they also bear poignant witness to his parental 
devotion and attentiveness.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under AG  B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
