1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-05988
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense
industry. The record shows Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties as
shown by 11 delinquent debts ranging in amounts from $54 to $16,340 for an
approximate total of $42,000. The debts include $4,800 in delinquent property taxes,
nine collection accounts, and one account charged off as a bad debt. He has not paid,
settled, or otherwise resolved any of the debts, and he does not have a realistic plan in
place to do so in the future. These circumstances create doubts about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. The record contains insufficient evidence to explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, as explained below, this case
is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, Paragraph E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting evidence, which3
will be identified as exhibits in this decision.  
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on April 9, 2009. The SOR is similar to a complaint as it detailed the factual
basis for the action under Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E for
personal conduct. Also, the SOR recommended submitting the case to an
administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke Applicant’s security
clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion, and he requested a decision
without a hearing. Accordingly, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On August 31, 2009, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file3
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by him on September
11, 2009. He then had 30 days to submit a documentary response setting forth
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. He did not respond within
the 30-day period. The case was assigned to me November 9, 2009. 
Rulings on Procedure
The SOR was amended, on my own motion, to correct Applicant’s social security
number. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for
the same company since 1995, and he works as a system administrator. It appears that
this is Applicant’s initial application for an industrial security clearance. 
Applicant married for the first time in 1985, and he divorced in 1999. The
marriage resulted in two children, born in 1990 and 1993. He married his current wife in
2002, and they had a child in 2003. 
 Exhibits 5, 6, and 9. 4
 Exhibit 4. 5
 Exhibit 7. 6
 Exhibit 8. 7
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties as shown by
delinquent accounts described in credit reports from 2007, 2008, and 2009.  The SOR4
alleged 11 delinquent accounts ranging in amounts from $54 to $16,340 for an
approximate total of $42,000. The debts include $4,800 in delinquent property taxes,
nine collection accounts, and one account charged off as a bad debt. Applicant admitted
the  indebtedness when he answered the SOR. He did not present proof of repayment,
settlement, or otherwise resolving the debts when he answered the SOR; he did not
reply to the FORM.
In August 2007, Applicant completed a security-clearance application in which he
responded to questions about his background, to include his financial record.  In5
response to Question 28a, he denied having any debts more than 180 days delinquent
in the last seven years. And in response to Question 28b, he denied currently having
any debts more than 90 days delinquent.
Applicant was interviewed in October 2007, as part of a background
investigation.  In relevant part, he provided the following information about his financial6
situation:
• His divorce resulted in a child-support payment of $600 monthly. He reported that
the divorce was costly, and the child-support payment has been a burden on him.
• After he remarried, his wife quit a good-paying job so she could care for her ailing
parents who live hundreds of miles away from Applicant. This resulted in
Applicant being the sole breadwinner in the household while attempting to
support two households, pay child support, and pay travel expenses associated
with visiting his wife and daughter.
• Applicant has borrowed from his 401(k) account to supplement his income, and
he then had two outstanding loans that he was repaying. 
• His wife is unaware of the financial problems. Applicant is afraid that she would
consider divorce if she knew the true state of their finances.
• He is unsure where he will find the money to resolve his delinquent property
taxes.
• In general, his plan was to pay off the delinquent accounts once his child-support
obligation ended in a couple of years. 
Subsequently, the Agency propounded written interrogatories to Applicant about
his finances.  He answered several but not all of the interrogatories in November 2008.7
Concerning the delinquent accounts, he explained that he would make repayments
once his child-support obligation ended. He did not respond to questions about why he
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
4
failed to list any delinquent accounts in response to Questions 28a and 28b of his
security-clearance application. And he indicated that he was unwilling to tell his spouse
about his current financial situation.  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,9
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating19
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 18.  20
5
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The Agency’s appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the18
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant19
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness, financial problems or difficulties, or financial irresponsibility. A security
concern typically exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern under
Guideline F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  20
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(a).  21
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 19(c). 22
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 20 (a) – (f) (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 23
6
The record here shows Applicant has, judging by the credit reports, a history of
financial difficulties dating back several years. His well-established history of financial
difficulties raises concerns because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of21 22
Guideline F. The facts are more than sufficient to establish the two disqualifying
conditions, and it suggests financial irresponsibility as well.
Under ¶ 20 of Guideline F, there are six mitigating conditions as follows:  23
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none, either individually
or in combination, are sufficient to mitigate and overcome the security concerns.
Applicant receives some credit under ¶ 20(b), because his financial difficulties are due,
in part, to his costly divorce from his first wife and the resulting child-support obligation,
which Applicant is still required to pay. These circumstances serve to extenuate or
mitigate Applicant’s history of financial difficulties. The credit is limited, however,
because the divorce took place several years ago and supporting one’s children is not
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and24
mitigating conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 15. 25
7
an unexpected circumstance. Further, what is missing here is a plan of action to repay,
settle, or otherwise resolve Applicant’s delinquent accounts. Without a realistic plan and
some measurable progress, it is too early to tell if he will resolve his delinquent debts
anytime soon. Looking forward, the likelihood of additional financial problems cannot be
ruled out. Indeed, both the delinquent property taxes and the 401(k) loans are red flags
for financial distress and instability.   
Turning next to the personal conduct allegations, Guideline E  includes issues of24
false statements and credible adverse information that may not be enough to support
action under any other guideline. The overall concern is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  25
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
The issues here are the truthfulness of Applicant’s answers to two questions on
his security-clearance application. He answered both questions in the negative thereby
denying any financial delinquencies within the relevant periods. His answers to these
questions were not discussed during his background interview. He did not respond to
interrogatories about why he failed to list any delinquent accounts in response to
Questions 28a and 28b of his security-clearance application. And because this case is
decided on the written record, my ability to assess credibility is limited. Given all the
circumstances and limitations of the written record, the  evidence is insufficient to
conclude that Applicant’s answers to Questions 28a and 28b were knowingly and
willfully false. Accordingly, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b are decided for
Applicant. 
In addition under Guideline E, the SOR alleged Applicant’s failure to inform his
spouse of his financial problems as a separate basis raising security concerns. The
theory here is that Applicant’s unwillingness to do so might make him vulnerable to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress that could be used against him to compromise
 See Revised Guidelines, ¶ 16(e). 26
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).27
8
classified information.  Although not fanciful, given all the circumstances and limitations26
of the written record, the evidence is insufficient to reach that conclusion. Accordingly,
the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c is decided for Applicant.
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s financial
difficulties create doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He did not
present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the nine-factor whole-person concept  and27
Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.k:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.      
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
