 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-10467   
                    ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
foreign preference. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), which she signed on September 7, 2007. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 On June 30, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
Applicant received the SOR on July 20, 2009. She signed her notarized Answer on July 
21, 2009, in which she admitted to all the allegations in the Statement of Reasons. She 
also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 31, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 5, 
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 27, 2009. During the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were marked as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and admitted without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
one exhibit, Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which also was admitted without objection. I held 
the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation, which was timely 
received and forwarded without objection by Department Counsel. Applicant's three 
additional documents are admitted as AE B through D. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on November 4, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 53 years old, is an interpreter and translator. She was born in France, 
but received Italian citizenship by virtue of her parents’ citizenship. Her parents currently 
live in Italy (GE 1, 2; Tr. 24). She has had strong attachments to the United States since 
childhood. Her father aided the British Army during World War II by gathering 
information from Italian locals regarding enemy weapon caches. He worked for the 
Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and was a diplomat in the United States in the 1960s. 
His contributions were recognized through a U.S. congressional resolution in the early 
1980s. Applicant lived and attended school in the United States as a child when her 
father was stationed in the United States. Another relative, in her grandparents’ 
generation, was a war hero who fought against Mussolini during World War II (GE 2; Tr. 
17-19). 
 
In 1982, Applicant earned the equivalent of a Bachelor’s degree in interpreting 
and translating at an Italian university (Tr. 29-30). She was employed at the U.S. 
embassy in Italy from approximately 1982 until 1994 (AE A). Applicant was certified by a 
U.S. national translators’ association in 1997 (Tr. 31). She worked as a staff assistant 
for an international banking agency from 1997 to 2001 (GE 2). She then worked as a 
freelance translator and interpreter for U.S. agencies. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed 
in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3
                                                
 
From 1985 to 1993, Applicant was married to an Italian citizen. She has one 21-
year-old son from this marriage. She came to the United States in 1994, at the age of 
38. She married a U.S. citizen at that time, and they divorced in 1999. Applicant has 
been married to her current husband, a U.S. citizen, since 2006. Her son is currently a 
dual citizen; he was solely an Italian citizen until December 2008, when he attained U.S. 
citizenship. He attends college in the United States (GE 1, 2; Tr. 24-29, 44-46).  
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in December 2003, and received her U.S. 
passport in January 2005. As of the date of the hearing, she also held a valid Italian 
passport, which was issued in June 2003 and will expire in June 2013.3 She noted in 
her Interrogatory response that she possesses the passport because she holds Italian 
citizenship (GE 1, 2).  
 
 Since becoming a United States citizen, Applicant has traveled to Italy once or 
twice per year (GE 1; Tr. 35, 47). She uses her Italian passport when traveling 
overseas because the airport lines are shorter for citizens of the European Union than 
for citizens of other countries (Tr. 35). Applicant is certain she used her Italian passport 
to enter Italy (Tr. 37). However, she was uncertain which other countries she entered 
or exited using her Italian passport. She traveled in 2007 to the United Kingdom (U.K.) 
(GE 2), but was unsure if she used her Italian or U.S. passport for that trip. In 2006, 
she visited Germany and the Czech Republic. She does not think she needed a 
passport to enter Germany, but may have used her Italian passport to enter the Czech 
Republic on that trip. (Tr. 35-37).  
 
Applicant's statements in her Interrogatory response of 2008 were more certain: 
she stated that she traveled to the U.K., Germany, Italy and the Czech Republic using 
her Italian passport (GE 2; Tr. 35). She submitted a copy of her Italian passport, but the 
country stamps are barely legible (AE B). It shows at least two trips: one is an entry 
into the United States in August 2003, before she attained U.S. citizenship. The other 
entry appears to be dated August 2004, but the country cannot be deciphered. In her 
post-hearing submission, Applicant states she is “pretty sure” she used her U.S. 
passport to enter the Czech Republic, but the stamp is faded (GE 2; Tr. 36).  
 
Applicant's U.S. passport shows multiple trips abroad from 2005 through 2009. 
Most stamps indicate entry into the United States. The legible foreign stamps indicate 
(1) entry or exit from Germany in July 2006; (2) entry or exit from Italy in November 
2007; (3) entry or exit from Italy in September 2008; and (4) entry or exit from Germany 
in March 2009. (AE C). 
 
 The DOHA interrogatory Applicant received in December 2008 asked if she is 
willing to surrender, destroy or invalidate her Italian passport. It also provided directions 
on how to surrender her foreign passport to a cognizant security officer, such as a 
 
3 Applicant's foreign passport is a European Union passport; however, it will be identified in this decision 
as an Italian passport to ensure clarity as to the specific European country involved. 
 
 
4
                                                
company Facility Security Officer (FSO), and how to document these actions. Applicant 
responded that she was not willing to do so because, “due to the extremely good 
relations between Italy & United States, I see no reason for destroying, surrendering or 
invalidating passport.” (GE 2). At the hearing, she again testified that she is not willing 
to surrender, destroy or invalidate it, and reiterated that Italy and the United States 
have good relations (GE 2; Tr. 38, 40-41). Appellant also testified that she is not willing 
to renounce her Italian citizenship (Tr. 40). 
 
 Applicant voted once in an Italian election in 2005. In her Interrogatory 
response, she noted that she voted because “it is legal.” She testified at hearing that 
she did so because the Italian embassy now offers the option of voting by mail. (GE 2; 
Tr. 41-42). Other elections have been held since 2005, but she has not voted because 
she understood that it would be an issue for her security clearance processing (Tr. 42). 
She has no intent to vote in future Italian elections. Applicant also holds an Italian 
driver’s license (Tr. 47). As of December 2008, she had a bank account in Italy valued 
at approximately $900. Applicant does not receive income from this account, and she 
does not own property in Italy. (GE 2; Tr. 46). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
Applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, Applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
5
                                                
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
Applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern involving foreign preference arises  
 
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. (AG ¶ 9) 
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport;… (7) voting in a foreign election… 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of Italy and the United States. Dual citizenship, in and of 
itself, is not disqualifying;8 nor is Applicant’s acquisition of an Italian passport in 2003, 
before she became a U.S. citizen. However, conduct that constitutes an exercise of 
foreign citizenship, after becoming a U.S. citizen, is disqualifying. Applicant continues 
to exercise the right of an Italian citizen by possessing a valid foreign passport after 
becoming a U.S. citizen in 2003. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.  
 
 Applicant also exercised her rights as an Italian citizen by voting in the Italian 
presidential election of 2005. She has no intent to do so in the future, a decision that is 
based on the effect it could have on her security clearance eligibility. Applicant's vote in 
a foreign election occurred after she became a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 10(a)(7) applies.  
 
I considered the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct 17, 2000). 
 
 
 
6
                                                
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a United States citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant travels to Italy several times per year. She uses her foreign passport 
during these trips to enter and/or exit Italy because of the convenience of using the 
shorter lines reserved for European Union citizens. The Appeal Board has held that 
personal convenience does not constitute a mitigating factor when evaluating the 
security significance of use of a foreign passport.9 Applicant’s exercise of her Italian 
citizenship by using her foreign passport occurred numerous times since she attained 
U.S. citizenship in 2003. AG ¶ 11(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Applicant was on notice that her valid foreign passport represented a security 
concern from at least December 2008, when she received the DOHA Interrogatory. It 
indicated the accepted methods that she could use to render her foreign passport 
unusable: destruction, invalidation, or surrender to a cognizant security authority. 
Applicant declined to exercise any of the options at that time. She reiterated at the 
hearing that she would not do so. AG ¶ 11(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
9 ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Sep 15, 1999). 
 
 
7
 
 Dual citizenship that is passively acquired through birth in a foreign country or 
an applicant's parents’ citizenship is not disqualifying under the Department of Defense 
regulation that governs security clearance adjudications. However, if a dual citizen 
holds a passport issued by a foreign country, and also wishes to obtain a security 
clearance, then a security concern arises and further inquiry is required (see AG ¶ 
10(a)(1)). In such situations, the concern can be mitigated if the foreign passport is 
destroyed, invalidated or surrendered to a cognizant security authority. Here, 
Applicant‘s Italian citizenship, which arose passively through her parents’ citizenship, is 
not the security concern, but her desire to both possess a valid foreign passport and a 
security clearance. Applicant indicated when she answered the interrogatories, and 
again at the hearing, that she was unwilling to destroy, invalidate or surrender her 
foreign passport. 
 
 Finally, it should be noted that Applicant's loyalty to the United States is not at 
issue. The Directive is clear: a security clearance determination is not a determination 
as to an applicant's loyalty (see Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, §7). 
Applicant credibly testified to her loyalty to the United States, and her employment at a 
United States embassy for more than a decade without incident supports her 
statement. However, the relevant guideline in this case calls for certain steps to be 
taken to resolve the security concern. Applicant declined to do so, and therefore, she 
cannot be granted a security clearance.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.c.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
