  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11098 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has two unpaid judgments, a federal tax lien, and 21 additional 
delinquent accounts totaling in excess of $150,000. He has failed to document payment 
on any but one of the debts. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s 
security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 8, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On July 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 10, 2009. The FORM contained nine 
attachments. On August 13, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On September 9, 2009, Applicant responded to the FORM and presented a letter 
with exhibits. Department Counsel did not object to the material. Applicant's response 
was admitted as exhibits A through C into the record. On September 30, 2009, I was 
assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
1.d, 1.h – 1.n, and 1.t – 1.y. Applicant admitted the remaining factual allegations, with 
explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old program manager who has worked for a defense 
contractor since August 2008. The record fails to indicate if Applicant has a security 
clearance, but he did hold a top secret security clearance when in the Air Force. In 
2002, Applicant retired from the U.S. Air Force as a lieutenant colonel (O-5). (Item 4)  
 
 Following his return from an overseas embassy position in January 2000, 
Applicant had difficulties with credit card bills being delivered to his overseas address. 
Between September 2001 and September 2002, he was late paying his credit card 
debts. (Item 5)  
 
 In March 2009, Applicant responded to written interrogatories. (Item 5) Between 
1999 and 2001, Applicant’s mother2 and mother-in-law each suffered from cancer. Due 
to both mothers being sick, Applicant and his spouse traveled from Europe to the U.S. 
Applicant was stationed overseas and traveling back to the U.S. impacted their 
finances. (Item 5) In 2001, his youngest son became addicted to alcohol and drugs 
during his first year in college. Applicant incurred expenses paying for his son’s 
rehabilitation, medical bills, and legal bills.  
 
 Twice Applicant has had problems paying his federal income tax in a timely 
manner. In October 2005 and November 2005, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
 
 
2 In 2007, his mother died and his mother-in-law has since become handicapped. (Applicant’s response to 
FORM) 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
garnished his wages. (Item 5) Applicant asserts he set up a repayment plan before the 
garnishment commenced. The garnishment lasted two months. Applicant also owed 
$19,000 for unpaid 2007 federal income tax. (Applicant’s Response to FORM) He 
asserts he is making $1,200 monthly payments to the IRS as agreed. (Item 3)  
 
Between July 2007 and August 2008, Applicant was unemployed. Applicant fell 
behind on his debts, mortgage, and car payments. Applicant’s September 2009 credit 
bureau report (CBR) indicates he was 60-days past due for June and July 2009, 90-
days past due for April and May 2009, and 120-days past due for the 13 months 
previous. (Ex. 3) The same CBR indicates he has been current on his second mortgage 
for the months of May, June, and July 2009, but had been 120-days past due five times 
during the previous year. (Ex. 3) Applicant disputes being late paying his second 
mortgage.  
 
 In February 2006 and May 2007, Applicant was interviewed concerning his 
financial situation. In February 2006, Applicant stated all of his student loans and the 
student loans for his two children were unpaid. (Item 5) In response to the FORM, 
Applicant asserts the four student loans with the Department of Education have been 
consolidated into a single loan and the three student loans with a state higher education 
lender have been consolidated into a single loan. No documentation supporting his 
assertion is included in the FORM or his response to it. 
 
A $4,057 judgment by a state higher education lender (SOR ¶ 1.b) was the result 
of Applicant having cosigned on his son’s educational loan. In March 2009, he stated he 
had only recently become aware of the judgment. He asserts his son is on a monthly 
repayment plan. Applicant requested documents from creditor. (Item 5) 
 
 As of February 2006, Applicant’s monthly net income was $12,016 and his 
monthly expenses were $3,325. He asserted he was paying $5,829 on his monthly 
debts, which included: $3,300 for mortgage, $900 for car payments, $400 payment to 
the IRS, and $250 on combined student loans. Applicant’s monthly net remainder (net 
income less net expenses and debt payment) was approximately $2,800. (Item 5) No 
documents were presented as to payment on these debts. 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant included a copy of a certified mail receipt 
dated July 17, 2009, showing mail sent to a credit bureau. (Ex. B) Following the receipt 
are two pages asking the credit bureau to update his CBR. Applicant enclosed a copy of 
his September 2009 CBR (Ex. C) from one of the three major credit bureaus.  
 
 Applicant asserts he is making $1,200 monthly payments on the $19,444 federal 
tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.c); $585 monthly payments on $22,268 owed on a national credit card 
account (SOR ¶ 1.e); $315 monthly payments on the student loans of $12,263 with the 
Department of Education ($12,263, SOR ¶ 1.e, $18,900, SOR ¶ 1.g, $8,304, SOR ¶ 1.r, 
and $11,803, SOR ¶ 1.s); and is making $285 monthly payments on the $15,217 
student loans with a state higher education lender ($7,983, SOR ¶ 1.o, $2,186, SOR ¶ 
1.p, and $3,144, SOR ¶ 1.q). However, Applicant provided no documentation supporting 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
his assertion of timely monthly payments on these accounts. No cancelled checks, 
statements from creditors, bank statements evidencing monthly withdrawals of these 
amounts, or other documentation of payment were received. 
 
 In his answer to the FORM, Applicant states a number of accounts were in 
satisfactory status as evidenced by Ex. C. Applicant’s September 2009 CBR lists six 
accounts being reported as paid or being paid as agreed. However, the account 
numbers listed in his September 2009 CBR are not the same account numbers listed in 
Applicant’s CBR supporting the SOR. There is no showing that the account numbers 
from the earlier CBR represent the same accounts in the later CBR. Those six creditors 
are: $2,576 owed on a national credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.i); $3,956 owed on a 
national credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.j); two credit union accounts of $750 (SOR ¶ 1.k) 
and $912 (SOR ¶ 1.w); and two accounts $1,052 (SOR ¶ 1.t) and $1,231 (SOR ¶ 1.u) 
for vehicles purchases by his sons with the same creditor. 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the FORM states five accounts were being paid 
satisfactorily as evidenced by his September 2009 CBR. (Ex. 3) However, those five 
creditors are not listed in that CBR. Those accounts are: a $753 collection (SOR ¶ 1.l) 
by an agency collecting for the same creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.j; two accounts $2,733 
(SOR ¶ 1.m) and $2,077 (SOR ¶ 1.n) with the same department store; a $1,075 bank 
account (SOR ¶ 1.v); and $5,340 owed to a university (SOR ¶ 1.x).  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has paid a $2,151 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a) or a 
$4,057 judgment obtained by a state higher education lender (SOR ¶ 1.b). In February 
2006, Applicant indicated he was going to investigate the $19,286 (SOR ¶ 1.y) debt 
being collected by a collection agency for a national credit card company.  
 
 Applicant’s September 2009 CBR lists one bank credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.h) 
as paid or paying as agreed on. (Ex. 3) The account number in the CBR is the same 
account number in the CBRs supporting the SOR. 
 
 A summary of the 25 debts asserted in SOR follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Judgment. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant.  
$2,151 Applicant asserts this was settled in July 2008. 
Applicant presented no evidence of settlement or 
payment. 
b Judgment by 
state higher 
education 
student loan. 
$4,057 
 
Unpaid. Appears on Applicant’s September 2009 
CBR. (Ex. C)  
c IRS Federal 
Tax lien for 
2007 income 
$19,444 
 
Unpaid. Appears on Applicant’s September 2009 
CBR. (Ex. C) He asserts he is making monthly 
payments of $1,200. (Item 3) There is no 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
tax. documentation of payment having been made. 
d National credit  $1,997 Unpaid. $1,551 past due appears on Applicant’s  
 card account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
 September 2009 CBR. (Ex. C) Applicant asserts this 
was paid in full. 
e National credit 
card account.  
 
 
$22,268 $20,484 was charged off as a bad debt. (Ex. C) The 
high balance was $22,693. This account shows the 
$1,551 past due, which appears in SOR ¶ 1.d. In his 
SOR response, Applicant asserts he was making 
$585 monthly payments on this debt. (Item 3) 
Applicant asserts he has made 20 consecutive 
payments as agreed. There is no documentation 
supporting his assertion or documentation of 
payment having been made.  
f Federal 
student loan.  
 
 
 
$12,263 Unpaid. In his SOR response, Applicant asserts he 
was making $315 monthly payments on this debt. 
(Item 3) In his answer to the FORM, he states the 
account is in satisfactory status as evidenced by Ex. 
C; however, this account does not appear in Ex. C. 
There is no documentation establishing payment.  
g Federal 
student loan.  
$18,900 See SOR ¶ 1.f.  
h Bank credit 
card account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
$1,868 This account was paid or is being paid as agreed. 
(Ex. C)  
i National credit 
card account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
$2,579 Applicant asserts he disputed this account in 2006 
as paid in full and it does not appear on his CBR. 
(Item 5) Applicant asserts account is in satisfactory 
status and was paid in full in November 2007. (Item 
5) Account numbers with this creditor do not match 
earlier CBR account numbers with this same 
creditor.  
j National credit 
card account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
$3,956 Applicant asserts he disputed this account in 2007 
as paid in full and it does not appear on his CBR. 
(Item 5) Account closed at consumer’s request. (Item 
8) Applicant asserts account is in satisfactory status 
and was paid in full in November 2007. (Item 5) 
Account numbers with this creditor do not match 
earlier CBR account numbers with this same 
creditor. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
k Credit Union 
account. Debt 
denied by 
Applicant. 
$750 Applicant asserts account was paid in full in 2004. 
CBR dated January 2009 lists the account as 
“paid.” (Item 5) Item 8 lists a $750 charge off. 
Applicant asserts he disputed this account in 2006 
as paid in full and it did not appear on his CBR. 
(Item 5) Applicant asserts account is in satisfactory 
status and was paid in full in November 2007. (Item 
5) Account numbers with this creditor do not match 
earlier CBR account numbers with this same 
creditor. 
l Collecition 
agency 
account.  
Debt denied 
by Applicant. 
$753 
 
Asserts account was disputed as paid in full and 
does not appear on CBRs. (Item 5) As of February 
2007, Applicant stated he would check into this 
account. (Item 5) In his answer to the FORM, he 
states the account is in satisfactory status as 
evidenced by Ex. C. This creditor does not appear 
in Ex. C.  
m Department 
store account. 
Debt denied 
by Applicant.  
$2,733 
 
Asserts account was settled in 2006. (Item 5) In 
February 2006, he asserted he had set up 
payments with this and the following account, both 
with the same department store. In his answer to 
the FORM, he states the account is in satisfactory 
status as evidenced by Ex. C. This creditor does not 
appear in Ex. C. Same creditor as listed in SOR ¶ 
1.n. 
n Department 
store account. 
Debt denied 
by Applicant. 
$2,077 Unpaid. Second account with the same creditor 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.n. Same creditor as listed in SOR 
¶ 1.m. 
o State student 
loan.  
 
 
 
 
$7,983 
 
Applicant asserts this debt and the following two 
debts, all with the same state educational lender, 
have been consolidated into a single loan with a 
balance of $15,217. (Item 5) In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant asserts he is making $285 monthly 
payments on this debt. (Item 3) In his answer to the 
FORM, he states the account is in satisfactory 
status as evidenced by Ex. C. This creditor does not 
appear in Ex. C.  
p State student 
loan.  
$2,186 
 
See SOR ¶ 1. o. 
q State student 
loan.  
$3,144 
 
See SOR ¶ 1. o. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
r Federal 
student loan 
$8,304 There is no documentation showing any payment. 
Applicant’s September 2006 CBR indicates the 
account was assigned to an attorney for collection 
as it had been 120 days or more past due. See SOR 
¶ 1.f. 
s Federal 
student loan. 
$11,803 
 
See SOR ¶ 1.f.  
t Applicant co-
signed on 
son’s car. Debt 
denied by 
Applicant. 
$1,058 Applicant asserts account was paid in full in 
November 2007. (Item 5) Reported as a loss by 
credit grantor on Applicant’s September 2006 CBR. 
Applicant asserts account is in satisfactory status 
(Ex. C) Account numbers with this creditor do not 
match earlier CBR account numbers.  
u Applicant co-
signed on 
second son’s 
car. Debt 
denied by 
Applicant. 
$1,231 Applicant asserts account was paid in full in 
November 2007. (Item 5) $2,731 was charged off. 
The unpaid balance was reported as a loss by the 
credit grantor. Applicant asserts account is in 
satisfactory status (Ex. C) Account numbers with 
this creditor do not match earlier CBR account 
numbers.  
v Bank credit 
card account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
$1,075 Asserts this account was disputed as paid in full in 
2007 and does not appear on his CBR. (Item 5) In 
his answer to the FORM, he states the account is in 
satisfactory status as evidenced by Ex. C. 
Applicant’s September 2009 CBR does not list an 
account with this creditor. (Ex. C) 
w Federal Credit 
Union account. 
Debt denied by 
Applicant. 
$912 Applicant asserts this was a personal loan paid in 
full in 1999 and does not appear on his CBRs. (Item 
5) Applicant asserts account is in satisfactory status. 
(Ex. C) Account numbers with this creditor do not 
match earlier CBR account numbers.  
x Collection 
action for 
university 
account. Debt 
denied by 
Applicant. 
$5,340 In February 2006, he stated he was going to 
investigate this debt. (Item 5) In his answer to the 
FORM, he states there is no change on this 
account. (Ex. C) 
y Collection 
agency 
collecting for 
national credit 
card account. 
Debt denied by 
$19,286 In March 2009, Applicant stated he was contacting 
the credit bureau to dispute this debt. He was 
awaiting a response. (Item 5) In February 2006, he 
stated he was going to investigate this debt. (Item 5) 
In his answer to the FORM, he states the account is 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Applicant. in satisfactory status as evidenced by Ex. C. 
Applicant’s September 2009 CBR does not list an 
account with this creditor. (Ex. C) 
  $158,118 Total debt listed in SOR 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
9 
 
 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant had two unpaid judgments, a federal tax lien, and 21 other 
delinquent accounts totaling approximately $158,000. He has provided insufficient 
documentation to show significant progress resolving any of his debts, except on the 
debt listed in SOR & 1.h. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by the 
expense of helping his mother and mother-in-law during their illnesses. Between 1999 
and 2001, Applicant’s mother and mother-in-law each suffered from cancer, which 
required Applicant and his spouse to return to the U.S. This travel impacted on his 
finances. Additionally, in 2001, Applicant incurred expenses paying for his son’s 
rehabilitation, medical bills, and legal bills.  
 
Some of the bills related to his relatives may have occurred under circumstances 
unlikely to recur. However, his 25 delinquent debts are both numerous and recent, as 
they remain unpaid. These unexpected expenses related to his relatives occurred eight 
years ago. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
In addition to the expenses related to his relatives, Applicant was unemployed 
July 2007 and August 2008. Under AG & 20(b), these are conditions largely beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, AG & 20(b) has limited applicability because Applicant’s 
latest CBR indicates he was frequently 60-days, 90-days, and 120-days past due on 
both his first and second mortgages during the last 18 months. Applicant disputes being 
late paying his mortgages; however, he provided no documentation showing his 
payments were timely made during the last year. I fail to find Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances when he failed to make timely mortgage 
payments.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because there is no showing Applicant received 
financial counseling and there is no clear indication that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control.  
 
Applicant’s most recent CBR (Ex. C) indicates the debt listed in SOR & 1.h is 
being paid as agreed. His recent CBR fails to support that any of the other financial 
obligations listed in the SOR are being paid as agreed. Applicant asserts, but fails to 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
document, that he is making timely, monthly payments to four creditors, which relates to 
nine of the 25 listed delinquent obligations. He provided no cancelled checks, no letters 
from the creditors, no monthly bank account statements showing monthly withdrawals 
for the amounts in question, no monthly account balances from the creditors showing 
the balance owed is being reduced, or proof that he is making timely payments. AG & 
20(d) does not apply except to the debt listed in SOR & 1.h. 
 
Applicant disputes a number of the debts. AG & 20(d) does not apply. Applicant 
has failed to show he has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of those debts. 
Nor this he provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of any dispute.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. During the past ten years, Applicant 
has experienced some expenses beyond his control. Those expenses, related to his 
mother, mother-in-law, and son, together with his year of unemployment, were events 
beyond his control. He asserts a number of the debts have been paid and he is making 
payment on additional debts. However, he provided no documentation supporting his 
assertions. There is no evidence he has made any payments or paid any debts, except 
for the debt listed in SOR & 1.h. He has more than $150,000 in delinquent debt that he 
has failed to adequately address.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1y:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
