 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11253 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2009, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 
24, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 3, 2009, scheduling the hearing 
 
2 
 
for August 18, 2009. The case was reassigned to me on August 12, 2009. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 2, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
On my own motion and without objection from either party, I amended the SOR 
to reflect the correct spelling of Applicant’s name. 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Russia. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 1 through 5 were 
received without objection. GE 6 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. I have 
considered Applicant’s objection in determining the weight accorded to GE 6. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received 
without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She was born in 
Russia, in what was then the Soviet Union. She is seeking a security clearance for the 
first time. She has worked for her current employer as a Russian linguist since 2007, but 
has been employed in the same geographic location in similar capacities for other 
defense contractors since 2000. She has a bachelor’s degree from a Russian university 
and completed post-graduate courses at an American university. She was married to a 
Russian citizen from 1985 until her divorce in 1993. She married a U.S. citizen in 1994. 
That marriage ended in divorce in 2004. She is engaged to be married to a U.S. citizen 
who is a member of the military reserves. She has a 24-year-old daughter from her first 
marriage and a 15-year-old child from her second marriage.1  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23, 26-27, 30-31, 33-34, 42; GE 1-3. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant met a member of the U.S. military while she was visiting Germany in 
1993 or 1994. She married him and moved from Russia to Germany in 1994. Her 
daughter moved to Germany to live with her, but she only stayed about a month. She 
did not like living in Germany, and she moved back to Russia to live with her father and 
Applicant’s parents. Applicant’s second child was born while she was in Germany. 
Applicant moved to the U.S. with her second husband and child in about 1997. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2000.2 
 
 Applicant’s parents and daughter are citizens and residents of Russia. Her 
parents are both in their early 70’s. Her father is a retired musician and teacher. He was 
a member of the Communist Party. He became disillusioned and quit the party in about 
the late 1990s. Her mother teaches music and English. Applicant’s daughter is a 
student. She is not married.3 
 
 Applicant visited her parents and daughter in Russia for about three weeks in 
2007. That is her only trip to Russia since she immigrated to the United States. Her 
younger child has not been to Russia. Her parents visited Applicant and her younger 
child in the United States in the 1990s, and again in 2000. Her daughter in Russia does 
not speak English, and she has never traveled to the United States. She plans to visit 
Applicant in the United States, but they do not have a date for her trip. Applicant 
contacts her parents by phone about twice a month and periodically by e-mail. She has 
regular contact with her daughter by e-mail and occasionally by telephone.4 
 
 Applicant credibly denied that she told an investigator in a 2002 interview that a 
threat against her family members in Russia could be used to coerce or compromise 
her.5 She stated in response to DOHA interrogatories: 
 
I had not considered it a possibility but if coercion were applied to myself 
or my family or friends, I would notify proper U.S. officials including my 
DoD contract project manager and security forces.6 
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. She owns a house in the United 
States. She views Russia as the country of her birth and has affection for the Russian 
people, but her loyalty and allegiance are to the United States.7  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 24, 27-31; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 24-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 28, 32-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 19, 40-41; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 40, 42-43. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant submitted letters from her supervisor and a colleague who is also her 
friend. The supervisor lauded her superior job performance. The colleague attested to 
Applicant’s character, patriotism, and dedication to the United States.8  
  
The Russian Federation 
 
The Russian Federation is composed of 21 republics. The government consists 
of a strong president, a prime minister, a bicameral legislature and a weak judiciary. It is 
a vast and diverse country with a population of 142 million people. It achieved 
independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991. It is a 
nuclear superpower that continues to develop politically, socially, and economically. 
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
mutual interest to the United States and Russia are counterterrorism and the reduction 
of strategic arsenals. Russia and the United States share a common interest in 
controlling the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver 
them. The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CRT) program was launched in 1992 to 
provide for the dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction in the former Soviet 
Union. The CRT program was renewed in 2006 for seven years, until 2013. 
 
 Since 2003, U.S.-Russian relations have often been strained. Tensions between 
the United States and Russia increased in August 2008, when Russia sent its army 
across an internationally recognized boundary in an attempt to change by force the 
borders of Georgia, a country with a democratically-elected government. Russia’s 
assault on Georgia followed other troubling signs: threats against Poland, including the 
threat of nuclear attack; suspicious poisonings and killings of journalists and those 
deemed “undesirable,” including the President of Ukraine; the apparent use of energy 
resources to apply political pressure against Ukraine, Lithuania, and the Czech 
Republic; and the creation in Russia’s state-controlled media of an “enemy image” of 
the United States.  
 
The Russian Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on 
collection of information from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies 
and has sought to obtain protected information from them through industrial espionage. 
Russian espionage specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. 
As of 2005, Russia and China were the two most aggressive collectors of sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology and accounted for the majority of such targeting. Russia is a 
leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related 
technology to China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. 
 
The threat of terrorism in Russia continues to be significant. Travel in the vicinity 
of Chechnya may be dangerous, despite Russian efforts to suppress the terrorists. Acts 
of terrorism include taking hostages and bombings.  
 
                                                          
8 AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international human rights standards, 
but human rights abuses continue. Both Russian federal forces and Chechen rebel 
forces act with impunity while engaging in torture, summary executions, 
disappearances, and arbitrary detentions. Additional problems include corruption, media 
suppression, life-threatening prison conditions, and corruption in law enforcement.  
 
The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct warrantless searches of residences and other premises and 
electronic surveillance without judicial permission. This surveillance includes Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic.  
Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access to the personal 
information of users of telephone and cell phone services.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
6 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s parents and daughter are citizens and residents of Russia. Russia is 
a diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States in some areas where both 
countries have mutual interests. For example, Russia is a key partner in efforts to 
reduce proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and control of nuclear materials. 
However, Russia is also one of the world’s most aggressive nations in the collection of 
 
7 
 
U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic information. Applicant’s family members’ 
presence in Russia creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant’s father is a former member of the Communist 
Party. That is a fact and circumstance included in the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a that 
Applicant’s “parents are citizens and residents of Russia.” SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
 Applicant has visited Russia once since she has immigrated to the United States. 
That does not raise security concerns independent of those raised by her family’s 
presence in Russia. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for Applicant.  
 
 The government has not established that Applicant told an investigator in a 2002 
interview that a threat against her family members in Russia could be used to coerce or 
compromise her. That information, even if established, would be a fact and 
circumstance included in the allegations that Applicant’s parents and daughter are 
citizens and residents of Russia. SOR ¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant is clearly a loyal U.S. citizen with no allegiance to the government of 
Russia. However, because of her close family ties to Russia and the nature of the 
government of Russia, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable to the security concerns related to her parents and daughter.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Russia. Her parents and 
daughter are citizens and residents of Russia. Her father is no longer a member of the 
Communist Party. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United 
States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the 
foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. Russia engaged in armed conflict 
with a democracy friendly with the United States; it has human rights issues; it has been 
victimized by terrorism; and it is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. The complicated relationship of Russia to the United States places a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her immediate family 
members in Russia do not pose a security risk. Applicant is obviously an intelligent, 
honest, trustworthy, and loyal U.S. citizen. She simply was unable to mitigate the 
considerable security concerns raised by her family in Russia. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
