                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10526 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on July 13, 2008, as part of her employment with a defense contractor. On May 
28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 10, 2009. She admitted eight and 
denied six of the factual allegations under Guideline F, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 6, 
2009, and the case was assigned to me on August 12, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on August 13, 2009, for a hearing on September 3, 2009. Applicant signed for 
the Notice of Hearing on August 18, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
government offered five exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 thru 5, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her behalf and offered 16 
exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A thru P which were received without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional documents. 
Applicant timely submitted four documents marked App. Ex. Q thru T, which were 
received without objection (Gov. Ex. 6, Department Counsel memorandum, dated 
September 29, 2009). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 
14, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old and has been an administrative assistant for a defense 
contractor for approximately one year. She is a single mother raising a son. She is 
enrolled in college working towards a degree in accounting (Tr. 53; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, 
dated July 15, 2008). Applicant's present net monthly salary is $2,450.06, with total 
monthly expenses of $2,295.44, leaving a monthly net remainder of $154.62. Her 
monthly salary does not take into account overtime pay. She usually averages 15 hours 
of overtime per pay period (Tr. 67-69; App. Ex. N, Personal Financial Statement, dated 
August 28, 2009). Applicant provided an updated response to the SOR at the hearing 
detailing the actions she has taken to resolve and pay her debts (App. Ex. A, Updated 
response to statement of reasons, undated). 
 
Credit reports reveal the following delinquent debts for Applicant; a medical 
collection account for $100 (SOR 1.a); another medical collection account for $100 
(SOR 1.b); a collection account for a fitness center for $220 (SOR 1.c); a charged off 
account to a finance company for $220 (SOR 1.d); a charged off account to the same 
finance agency for $186 (SOR 1.e); a credit card debt charged off for $1,329 (SOR. 1.f); 
a collection account for a retail store chain for $697 (SOR 1.g); a collection account for 
another department store for $358 (SOR 1.h); a mortgage account 90 days past due for 
$1,000 (SOR 1.i); a credit card account charged off for $1,375 (SOR 1.j); an automobile 
loan charge off for $10,465 (SOR 1.k); a medical account in collection for $100 (SOR 
1.l); a cash advance account in collection for $420 (SOR 1.m); and an insurance 
account in collection for $325 (SOR 1.n; Gov. Ex. 3, Credit report, dated July 29, 2008; 
Gov. Ex. 4, Credit report, dated January 23, 2009; Gov. Ex. 5, Credit report, dated May 
14, 2009).   
 
Delinquent debts SOR 1.a and 1.b are medical debts for the care of Applicant's 
son. Both debts have been paid in full (Tr. 17-18, 54; App. Ex. B, Account activity, dated 
August 5, 2009; App. Ex. C, Paid in full letter, dated August 31, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt 1.c is a debt to a ladies fitness center. Delinquent debt 1.d is the 
same debt listed with a collection agency. Delinquent debt 1.e is a different debt to the 
same collection agency for the same ladies fitness center for fees from 2002. Applicant 
contracted with the ladies fitness center to use their facilities for the fee of $29 per 
month which she continuously paid. She has no record of the payments she made since 
 
3 
 
 
the payments were over six years ago. Applicant requested verification of the debts 
from the collection agency. She was advised that there is no record of a debt for her 
from 2002. Applicant used the center and paid her fees until the center went out of 
business. She does not believe she has a balance owed from 2002 until the center 
ceased business in 2006. She requested verification of the debt from the collection 
agency. She has not received a response from the collection agency (Tr. 27-32, 55-56; 
App. Ex. D, Credit reporting agency update, dated August 28, 2009).  
 
Delinquent debt 1.f is an account in collection for a credit card. Applicant has an 
agreement with the collection agency for payment of $50 per month on the debt. She 
made payments of $100 and $50. She is attempting to make a further payment by bank 
draft but the collection agency is having difficulty with the transaction. The funds are 
available for withdrawal (Tr. 32-34, 57-58; App. Ex. E, Letter, dated February 26, 2009; 
App. Ex. Q, Applicant's letter, dated September 17, 2009; App. Ex. T, Bank Statement, 
dated September 17, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt 1.g has been settled for $361.84 and paid in full (Tr. 34, App. Ex. 
F, Letter and cancelled check, dated June 30, 2009). Delinquent debt SOR 1.h has 
been settled for $216.24 and paid in full (Tr. 34, 59; App. Ex. G, letter and bank account 
statement, dated July 7, 2009). Delinquent debt 1.i is for Applicant's mortgage listed as 
90 days pat due. Applicant restructured her mortgage and it is now current (Tr. 34, 59-
60; App. Ex. H, Letter, dated August 10, 2009).  
 
Delinquent debt 1.j is for a charged off credit card account with a balance of 
$1,598. Applicant has an agreement to pay $75 month until the debt is satisfied. 
Applicant has made payments totaling $475 (Tr. 34-35, 60; App. Ex. I, Letter, dated July 
17, 2009).  
 
Delinquent debt 1.k is the remainder on an automobile loan after the car was 
repossessed. The car was purchased by Applicant and a former boyfriend, the father of 
her child. The boyfriend did not make his share of the payments and the car was 
repossessed. The actual amount of the debt after Applicant received credit for charges 
that no longer are applicable is $7,689.91. She received a settled offer of $3,844.96, but 
she was unable to take advantage of the offer. Applicant reached an agreement with the 
collection agency to pay $150 monthly until the debt is satisfied. Her first payment was 
made on August 28, 2009 (Tr. 36-43; App. Ex. J, Check, dated August 28, 2009; App. 
Ex. P, Letter, dated January 16, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt 1.l is for a medical account in collection. Applicant disputed the 
debt and attempted to research it with the collection agency. She had a medical 
insurance account that paid her co-pays. The debt may be a duplicate of the debts 
listed at SOR 1.a and 1.b since they are for the same amount on the same day of 
service. She paid these debts. The credit reporting agencies have removed the debt 
from her credit report. Applicant assumes it was removed because it was determined 
based on her dispute that the debt was listed in error. It is not listed on her present 
credit report (Tr. 43-49, 60-61; App. Ex. K, Credit report, dated August 28, 2009). 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant disputed the delinquent debt at SOR 1.m. She never had an account 
with the creditor listed and does not know about any debt owed. The debt has been 
removed from her credit report by the credit reporting agency because it is either no 
longer being reported by the creditor or the creditor has directed that it be removed (Tr. 
49-51). 
 
Delinquent debt 1.n is for fees owed to the insurance company on the car that 
was repossessed in SOR 1.k. Applicant's former boyfriend was to pay the insurance on 
the car. He provided Applicant with funds for half of the debt. Applicant used her funds 
for the other half of the debt and paid the debt in full (Tr. 51-52, 61-62, 64-65; App. Ex. 
S, receipt, dated September 11, 2009). 
 
Applicant's performance rating from her employer shows that she is highly 
regarded and was recommended for a salary increase. (App. Ex. L, Employee 
Performance Review, dated June 25, 2009). A former supervisor for Applicant noted 
that she is efficient, competent, organized, and has excellent rapport with customers. 
She has a strong work ethic and is trustworthy and professional (App. Ex. O, letter, 
dated September 1, 2009). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are still required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts as listed on credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying 
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC 
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).   
 
 I considered the Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) raised 
by Applicant's testimony. FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), 
and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant is a single mother raising her 
 
6 
 
 
son. The father of her child is required to assist with payment of certain debt but he has 
only provided limited assistance. However, Applicant has paid some of her debts and 
actively worked with the creditors and credit reporting agencies to resolve her debts. 
She has demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Since she 
is actively working on her delinquent debts, they do not cause doubt concerning her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant has the ability to pay the debts, has shown a strong desire to pay them, and 
has shown a good-faith effort to pay them. Applicant paid six of the debts, either in full 
or by settlement. One debt, her mortgage, is now current. She is paying three debts 
under an agreed plan and is current with her payments. She disputed four debts with 
the creditors or the credit reporting agencies. Two have been removed from her credit 
reports and she is waiting action on the two remaining disputes. She took concrete 
action to address her delinquent debts. Applicant mitigated security concerns based on 
her finances. 
 
 “Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Appellant's excellent 
work evaluation and her reputation with her former supervisor. Appellant must show a 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction 
through payment of debts. She is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that she 
paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that she has a plan 
 
7 
 
 
to resolve her financial problems and takes significant action to implement that plan. 
The entirety of her financial situation and her actions can reasonably be considered in 
evaluating the extent to which her plan to reduce her outstanding indebtedness is 
credible and realistic. Available, reliable information about the person's behavior, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct 
may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.   
 
Applicant established a meaningful track record of debt payment by presenting 
sufficient information to show she paid six of the delinquent debts in full and her 
mortgage payments are current. She has agreements in effect for three other debts and 
her payments under the plans are current. She disputed other accounts and they have 
either been resolved in her favor or she is waiting for the results of the disputes. She 
has sufficient monthly income to meet her present obligations. Applicant demonstrated 
that her financial plan to resolve her debts is credible and realistic, and she is managing 
her finances responsibly under the circumstances. The management of her present 
finances and her past obligations indicates she will be concerned, responsible, and not 
careless in regard to sensitive information. Appellant is not financially overextended and 
she is living within her means. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
or doubts as to Appellant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She established 
that she is suitable for a security clearance. I conclude Appellant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her financial situation. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusions 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
