                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-11877 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns under to Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on September 29, 2008. On April 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response, which DOHA 
received on May 12, 2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 14, 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
2009. On July 16, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On July 28, 2009, DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for August 25, 2009. The hearing was held 
as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
received without objection. I held the record open until September 14, 2009, to afford 
the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted 
AE D, which was received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on September 7, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and I found his testimony to be 
credible.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old financial analyst associate, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since June 2008. GE 1, Tr. 16. He initially began working as an 
intern for his employer following graduation from college, and after a brief time was 
offered a full-time position. Tr. 16, 39, 74-75. Applicant is a first-time applicant for a 
security clearance. Obtaining a security condition is a condition of Applicant’s 
employment. Tr. 34.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 2004. Following high school, he 
pursued his education and graduated from a university in May 2008 with a Bachelor of 
Science in Finance. GE 1, Tr. 74-75. Applicant has never married and has no 
dependents. GE 1.  
 
Applicant has never been charged with any felony, firearms, or explosives 
offenses. He has not been charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type, non-traffic-
related offenses. He has not had any debts delinquent over 180 days, bankruptcy 
petitions, unpaid judgments, or unpaid liens. Apart from the Drug Involvement discussed 
infra, the case file contains no derogatory information about the Applicant. GE 1, GE 2. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his 
self-disclosure and is not disputed. Summarized, his past drug use consists of: (1) he 
used cocaine six times from about October 2007 to July 2008; (2) he contributed $40 
towards the purchase of cocaine one time during this time frame; and (3) he used 
marijuana two times from about January 2008 to February 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.c.) Applicant’s use of drugs was limited to a discreet period and only occurred when 
he was in the company of a former tennis team member, discussed infra. Response to 
SOR, GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 67-71. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
From an early age, Applicant was an avid tennis player. He began playing varsity 
tennis in high school, which continued into college. AE B, Tr. 65-66. During his senior 
year in college, Applicant shared a townhouse with three other tennis team members. 
One of the tennis team members (friend) introduced him to cocaine in October 2007. 
Applicant used cocaine a total of six times. His friend also introduced him to marijuana 
in January 2008. Applicant used marijuana twice. His friend was the sole source of 
cocaine and marijuana and all uses occurred in the townhouse they shared. Tr. 65-71. 
In July 2008, Applicant’s friend wanted to know if anyone in the townhouse wanted to 
contribute money towards cocaine and Applicant gave him $40. Tr. 82-83. Applicant’s 
drug use was limited to a 10-month period. Tr. 87 
 
 Applicant described his drug use as a “bad” and “stupid mistake.” Tr. 78. He 
candidly discussed his drug use and accepted full responsibility for his actions. Since 
his last drug use in July 2008, he has disassociated himself from his friend and does not 
associate with anyone who uses drugs. Tr. 73-74, 81. Applicant credibly testified that he 
does not now use drugs and does not intend to use drugs in the future. Tr. 87-88. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily underwent a substance abuse assessment performed by a 
qualified and licensed professional counselor and certified addiction counselor on 
September 11, 2009. The counselor’s evaluation included the use of Substance Abuse 
Subtle Screening Inventory (SASSI-3), Alcohol Use Profile (AUP), and Urinalysis 
(observed September 2, 2009 – Negative). The counselor concluded that the SASSI 
and AUP support and are congruent with Applicant’s self-report of drug use, and noted 
Applicant does not have any indications of abuse or dependency issues. The counselor 
added his negative urinalysis lends evidence of no current illicit drug use as well. The 
counselor opined that after reviewing the SASSI, AUP, urinalysis results, and clinical 
interview, it was his professional opinion that Applicant “does not have an illicit drug 
problem.” He concluded that Applicant’s commitment to remain drug free is credible 
“due to his maturity, stable personality and emotional condition, his understanding that 
his use of illicit drugs was wrong, his 14 months of abstinence, and his strongly 
expressed desire to pursue a career with [his employer]”. AE D. 
  
Applicant submitted a signed, sworn statement of intent, dated August 24, 2009, 
that he will continue to refrain from engaging in any illegal drug activity, with the 
understanding that any drug violation will result in the automatic revocation of any 
security clearance held by him. AE C, Tr. 87-89. He stated that he will “never use drugs 
again.” Tr. 87. He added that he has found a career that allows him to excel, and that 
the people in his workplace are mature and upstanding. Tr. 92-93. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, co-worker, and father testified on his behalf. His 
supervisor and co-worker hold secret security clearances, are senior company 
employees, and observe Applicant on a daily basis. Their testimony confirmed that 
Applicant is an honest, trustworthy and reliable employee. Applicant is their “go-to 
person,” who handles payroll for their 400-person division. They added that their 
company has no tolerance for drugs and are of the opinion that Applicant’s past drug 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
use is behind him. Applicant’s supervisor and co-worker both recommended that he be 
granted a security clearance. Tr. 15-48. 
 
 Applicant’s father is an accomplished and successful attorney. He has been and 
continues to be involved with his son. Although they do not live near each other, they 
maintain daily contact by e-mail and telephone contact on the weekends. They have 
similar sporting interests, which include tennis and soccer. Applicant’s father has 
discussed with Applicant the serious implications of drug involvement and made it clear 
to him that drug use is unacceptable and dangerous. His father described him as the 
“perfect” son, who never gave him any problems. He described how Applicant 
underwent a kidney transplant at age 18 and received a donor kidney from his mother. 
Applicant conveyed to his father that his drug mishap was an exercise of bad judgment 
and that will it not occur again. Tr. 48-63. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. He fully disclosed his drug abuse in his 
Response to the SOR and at his hearing. He admitted to use of marijuana and cocaine. 
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 and AG ¶ 
 
1 AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of 
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.”  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”2 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana and ecstasy or 3, 4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine are Schedule (Sch.) I controlled 
substances. See Sch. I(c)(9) and I(c)(10), respectively. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I); United States v. Crawford, 449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 
2006) (ecstasy). Cocaine is a Sch. II Controlled Substance. See Sch. II(a)(4) (cocaine). 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶ 26(a) fully applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in July 2008, about 15 
months before his hearing. His overall illegal drug use occurred during a 10-month 
period primarily during his senior year in college, and ceased altogether in July 2008. 
The absence of evidence of more recent or extensive drug use, his promise not to use 
illegal drugs in the future, and his favorable evaluation by a licensed professional 
counselor and certified addiction counselor eliminates doubts about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug 
use.3   
   
                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With maturity and new found responsibilities of his career, and 
complete disassociation from his former drug-using associate and former environment, 
his 15-month period of abstinence, and signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation, he has broken his patterns of drug abuse, and 
he has changed his own life. He has abstained from drug abuse and has no problem in 
doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) fully applies.  
 
His testimony and character evidence from senior company representatives 
show Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of a drug problem. He is viewed 
as a valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the 
defense industry is supported by senior company officials who know him personally and 
professionally, and by his own credible testimony and evidence presented. His father’s 
testimony demonstrated strong family support to avoid future drug use. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged that future drug abuse is incompatible with his future career, 
and manifested a steadfast commitment to continue a lifestyle consistent with total 
abstinence of any drugs.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
  
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
3In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employer and family support him. He has a history of 
stable employment and a strong work ethic. This support and self-introspection should 
ensure his continued success. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and 
commitment to remaining drug free. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe 
Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to 
recur. In sum, I find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain 
a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
