 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-12005
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is denied.
On August 7, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a clearance. On February 25, 2009,
DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were2
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official revision of the Directive,
the revised guidelines replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 W ithout objection, the document (identified in the transcript at p. 8) was included in the record with3
Applicant’s response.
 Identified in the transcript at pp.13 - 16.4
 Identified in the transcript at pp. 29 - 30.5
2
security concerns addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under2
Guideline F (financial considerations).
On May 27, 2009, Applicant provided a written notarized response (Answer) to
the SOR, with one attachment,  and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me3
on June 18, 2009. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on July 6, 2009, I convened a
hearing on July 29, 2009, at which the parties appeared as scheduled. The government
presented three documents included in the record without objection as Gx. 1 - 3.4
Applicant testified and submitted two documents admitted without objection as Ax. A
and B.  DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on August 6, 2009. Additionally, I5
left the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional relevant information. On
August 12, 2009, I received his post-hearing submission, which is included in the record
as Ax. C.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $31,694
in delinquent debt for an unpaid medical bill ($960) placed for collection in March 2007
(SOR ¶ 1.a); for a past due second mortgage account ($1,984) (SOR ¶ 1.b); for a
delinquent credit card account ($28,708) referred for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c); and an
unpaid medical bill ($42) for treatment received in March 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, claiming both were paid or otherwise resolved. Ax. B
supports his claim that SOR ¶ 1.a was being resolved through his medical insurance
(see also Tr. 34 - 35, 79), and Department Counsel acknowledged that one of the credit
reports in evidence (Gx. 2) showed the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d has been paid. (Tr.
12, 79) Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c on the basis that they are disputed debts.
In addition to the facts established through the pleadings, I make the following findings
of relevant fact.
Applicant is 59 years old and holds a bachelor,s degree in computer science. He
was a self-employed software engineer with his own small information technology
business from about June 1998 until June 2008, when his business, which had been
struggling for most of the preceding two years, failed. At that time, he hired on with his
current employer, a large defense contractor. (Answer; Gx. 1; Tr. 22) Applicant asserts
he had excellent credit, and that his business was successful and provided him with a
comfortable income until about 2006 or 2007. It was also around that time his mother
became ill and required full-time care. Applicant’s brother actually cared for their
3
mother, but Applicant provided substantial financial support. Unfortunately, when his
business began to fail, Applicant found himself overextended financially. (Answer; Tr. 21
- 23)
At times, Applicant was able to make as much as $30,000 in a single month from
his business. Generally, he chose to put the money back into the business and send
money to his brother for care of their mother. He usually sent him about $7,000 each
month. However, by the summer of 2007, the business would not support Applicant and
allow him to help his mother to the same extent. The business is still active and
provides him about $1,000 each month in addition to the $6,200 he nets each month
from his current job. Since he started working for his current employer, Applicant
estimates he has about $4,000 remaining each month after expenses, including a $300
monthly payment to his mother’s care. (Answer; Tr. 37 - 39, 50, 70 - 71)
Applicant has lived in the same condominium since about 2000. He has two
mortgages on that property. Around September 2007, he began having trouble paying
his bills and, by May 2008, foreclosure proceedings had begun. Applicant was able to
resolve the past due payments on his first mortgage, but, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, he
still owes at least $1,984 for missed payments on his second mortgage, which has a
balance of about $72,000. (Gx. 3) At the hearing, it was determined that Applicant has
not made any payments on the second mortgage since late 2007. (Tr. 59) He testified
that he has been trying to resolve his second mortgage for more than a year, that he is
disputing the actual amount he owes on that obligation, and that he has submitted
documents several times as requested by the mortgage company, only to be repeatedly
frustrated by the bank’s procedures and non-responsiveness. (Answer; Tr. 23 - 26)
Applicant further averred that he could provide post-hearing documentation of his
claims, but provided only an incomplete letter from the creditor who now holds the
account. (Ax. C) That letter and Applicant’s forwarding letter provided no new support
for Applicant’s claimed dispute with this creditor.
In 2001, Applicant took a cash advance of $45,000 against one of his credit
cards. He used the money to buy a boat. Credit reports (Gx. 2 and Gx. 3) show that
Applicant still owes about $28,708 on this debt, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant
denies he is obligated to pay this debt. He insists that between 12 and 24 months after
he took this advance, the credit card rates were increased from 10.9% to at least 25%.
Applicant’s position is that he no longer owes anything to the credit card company,
because they violated the terms of their original agreement. When asked if the rates
were increased because he had missed payments, he stated only that it was possible
he may have missed one or two payments.  (Answer; Tr. 29 - 32, 42 - 43, 66 - 68)
Applicant hired an attorney to help negotiate with the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and
1.c. He has had no success resolving either obligation through counsel. (Answer; Ax.
A). However, in December 2008, Applicant was offered a chance to settle the SOR ¶
1.c debt for $4,000. Despite having a significant positive cash flow at the time, he did
not act on the offer, choosing instead to ask the creditor to send his attorney a copy of a
proposed agreement for legal review. (Tr. 30 - 32) Applicant has not otherwise acted on
the debt and still questions whether he should have to pay even $4,000 to resolve it.
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
4
(Tr. 73) Despite claiming at hearing that he can document his dispute with the SOR ¶
1.c creditor, he made no post-hearing submission regarding that debt.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
 Directive, E3.1.14.10
 Directive, E3.1.15.11
5
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that: 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Available information shows the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d have been
paid or otherwise resolved. However, Applicant denied that he owes the debts alleged in
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, which total about $30,692. Accordingly, the burden remained with
the government to prove those allegations.  The record evidence (the government’s10
exhibits and Applicant’s testimony at the hearing) is sufficient to show that Applicant still
owes those debts. Also, it was learned at hearing that the Applicant has not made any
payments on his second mortgage, which has a balance of at least $72,000, since the
last quarter of 2007. This makes it likely that the SOR ¶ 1.b debt is actually larger than
alleged. Both debts have been delinquent since at least September 2007, and there is
no record of payment or other action to resolve either debt. The foregoing requires
application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
The government proved the controverted facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c,
and those facts raise security concerns under Guideline F. As a result, the burden
shifted to the Applicant to present information sufficient to refute the allegations, or to
mitigate the security concerns raised.  Because Applicant’s debts remain unpaid, his11
financial problems must be viewed as recent. While it may be that the circumstances
leading to his problems are not likely to recur, because, as discussed below, his
response to his financial problems has been insufficient, questions remain about his
judgment. Thus, available information precludes application of the mitigating condition at
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
 See footnote 6, supra.12
6
There is no record of financial counseling or other outside assistance, and he has
not shown that he has made any payments on either debt. Thus, the mitigating
conditions at AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control) and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) do not apply.
It is not controverted that Applicant’s financial problems resulted, in part, from the
failure of his business and from the need to support his ailing mother. These facts
require consideration of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). However,
this adjudicative factor can apply only if Applicant acted responsibly under the
circumstances. I conclude he has not done so. As to SOR ¶ 1.b, a debt for missed
payments totaling less than $2,000, he has had the means to pay this off since late
2008. Also bearing on this issue is the fact that, in 2007, he stopped paying anything to
the second mortgage, likely exacerbating his financial problems to an extent not
identified through his background investigation. As to SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant testified that
he was offered a chance to settle a $28,000 debt for $4,000 in December 2004. His
refusal to take advantage of that offer was ill-advised, to say the least. 
Applicant’s denial of both SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c was also based on his claimed
disputes with both creditors. His response requires consideration of the mitigating
condition at AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof
to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue). I conclude this does not apply. Applicant was provided extra time after the
hearing to present documents to support his claims, yet the documentation presented in
his post-hearing submission (Ax. C) has no persuasive value in the face of the
government’s information. On balance, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the
security concerns raised by the government’s information about his finances.
Whole Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 59 years old, and
was a successful businessman for nearly 10 years. However, despite the fact his
financial problems since 2007 were due to circumstances beyond his control, there is
insufficient positive information about Applicant’s judgment to overcome the adverse
inferences to be drawn from his inadequate response to his financial problems. His
explanations for his inaction were not plausible, and available information shows that his
financial difficulties are unlikely to change in the near future. These facts and
circumstances present an unacceptable risk were he to be granted access to classified
information. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information about12
 See footnote 9, supra. 13
7
the Applicant’s background shows there are still doubts about his ability or willingness to
protect the government’s interests as his own. Because protection of the national
interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved for the
government.13
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
