 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11366 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 9, 2007. On May 
19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 28, 2009; answered it on June 9, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
June 12, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 24, 2009, and the 
case was assigned to me on July 27, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 
5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for August 31, 2009.  
 
On August 25, 2009, Department Counsel withdrew the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.k and 1.o-1.s. I treated Department Counsel’s action as a motion to amend the SOR 
and I granted it, with no objection by Applicant (Tr. 14-15).  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 14 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but presented no 
documents. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on September 10, 2009. 
 
Jurisdiction 
 
On my own motion, I raised the question of jurisdiction after Applicant testified he 
was “terminated” when he lost his security clearance, but his employer was holding his 
position for him if his clearance was reinstated (Tr. 72, 78). After the hearing, I 
requested Department Counsel to produce documentation from the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS) supporting jurisdiction in light of ISCR Case No. 08-09776 
(App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009) (Hearing Exhibit I).  
 
Department Counsel responded on November 4, 2009 (HX II). Attached to 
Department Counsel’s response were JPAS documents dated August 19, 2009, and 
November 4, 2009, reflecting that Applicant was not separated and was still being 
sponsored for a clearance by his employer, even though he is not working or being 
paid. I admitted the JPAS documents as GX 15 and 16, without objection from 
Applicant. Based on the JPAS documents and Applicant’s testimony, I am satisfied that 
DOHA had jurisdiction at the time the hearing commenced and as of the date of this 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 
1.f-1.j, 1.l-1.n, 1.t, and 1.w. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old intelligence analyst employed by a federal contractor. 
In 2002, he retired from the U.S. Air Force as a master sergeant (pay grade E-7) after 
more than 20 years of active duty. He received a security clearance in 1980 and 
eligibility for access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in 1989. While on 
active duty, he obtained a bachelor’s degree in April 2001 (GX 7 at 4).  
 
In August 2008, Applicant’s SCI access was revoked based on financial 
considerations (Tr. 7; GX 10). He requested a personal appearance before an 
administrative judge in accordance with Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, 
 
3 
 
 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended. Notwithstanding the 
administrative judge’s favorable recommendation, the Air Force Personnel Security 
Appeals Board upheld the revocation. Department Counsel and Applicant agreed that 
the administrative judge’s findings of fact at the personal appearance were true as of 
the date of the personal appearance and could be considered at this hearing without 
resubmission of the evidence presented at the personal appearance (Tr. 65-66). The 
administrative judge’s recommended decision is included in the record as GX 10.  
 
 While Applicant was on active duty, he deployed frequently and relied on his wife 
to handle the family finances. He learned that she was not a good money manager (Tr. 
31). Their financial difficulties started around 1995, when he returned from deployment 
and found out his wife had “maxed out” their credit card accounts (Tr. 55; GX 13). 
Although he and his wife obtained financial counseling while he was on active duty, they 
continued to have financial problems until his retirement (GX 13; GX 14).  
 
After Applicant retired, he accepted a civilian job in a location away from his last 
duty station. His wife and daughter decided not to move with him because his daughter 
wanted to finish high school without moving and changing schools (Tr. 32). He rented 
an apartment for his wife and daughter, and he rented a town home at his new job site. 
Although his wife was working and receiving up to $3,500 per month from Applicant, 
she did not always pay the bills when they were due (Tr. 32).  
 
After about a year, Applicant’s father passed away, and Applicant decided to 
return to his former location and be with his family. His wife decided she wanted a 
divorce. She moved out of the apartment without paying the last month’s rent for the 
apartment and a storage unit (Tr. 33). The three judgments alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.c were for unpaid rent. 
 
When the divorce was granted, Applicant was ordered to provide his wife and 
daughter with a car. He purchased the car and sent her money for the car payments, 
but she did not make the payments and the car was repossessed (Tr. 34-35). 
 
After Applicant learned the extent of his indebtedness, he contacted a debt 
management company and started to make payments to resolve the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.n, 1.t, and 1.v (GX 10-4-5). The debt management agency did 
not include the judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c in its plan for Applicant (Tr. 53), 
but he made an arrangement to pay $300 per month on the judgments (Tr. 41; GX 8 at 
6; GX 10 at 4-5). After his clearance was revoked in August 2008, he could no longer 
work on classified contracts, and he was forced to “take a vacation” without pay 
beginning in October 2008. Without any income other than his military retirement, he 
could not continue to make the payments. He still was not working or drawing pay as of 
the date of the hearing (Tr. 38-39).  
 
 At the personal appearance, Applicant submitted evidence that the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.n, 1.t, and 1.v were included in a negotiated payment plan 
and he was making regular payments pursuant to it (GX 10 at 4-5). At the hearing, he 
 
4 
 
 
testified he had suspended payments under the plan because he could no longer afford 
them.  
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.o-1.s are not listed because 
those allegations were withdrawn by Department Counsel. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a 
1.b 
1.c 
Apartment and 
Storage Unit 
(judgments) 
$3,318 Payment plan (suspended) GX 8 at 6; GX 10 at 4-
5; Tr. 41 
1.d Collection $1,417 Contacted creditor; 
unresolved 
GX 6 at 3; GX 9 at 3; 
Tr. 41-42 
1.e Health Club $1,513 Disputed; unresolved GX 5 at 8; GX 8 at 6; 
Tr. 44 
1.f Credit card $518 Payment plan (suspended) GX 10 at 5 
1.g Credit card $1,077 Payment plan (suspended) GX 10 at 5 
1.h Credit card $1,782 Payment plan (suspended) GX 10 at 5 
1.i Credit card $758 Paid GX 10 at 4 
1.j Credit card $570 Paid GX 10 at 4 
1.l Car 
repossession 
$7,504 Ex-wife’s debt; attempting 
to resolve 
GX 10 at 3; Tr. 46-47 
1.m Credit card $212 Making monthly payments GX 8 at 9; Tr. 47 
1.n Credit union $390 Payment plan (suspended) GX 8 at I10 
1.t Car 
repossession 
$9,988 Payment plan (suspended) GX 8 at I13;  
GX 10 at 5 
1.u Collection $283 Paid GX 10 at 4; Tr. 50 
1.v Collection $1,417 Payment plan (suspended) GX 8 at I21 
1.w Dish TV $152 Wife’s debt; unresolved GX 5 at 8; Tr. 51-52 
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing that he disputed the health club debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. It arose when he moved back to his family’s location and informed the club 
that he was moving (Tr. 44). He testified he was assured by the club owner that there 
was no problem with terminating his membership, but the debt appeared on his credit 
report after another company took over the club (Tr. 44). He did not present any 
documentation of his dispute.  
 
 Department Counsel questioned the administrative judge’s finding at the 
personal appearance that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u was paid, pointing out the 
discrepancy in account numbers (HX I). I have accepted the administrative judge’s 
finding that it was paid, because there are no debts to that creditor on the credit reports 
dated after the personal appearance (GX 6; GX 9). 
 
 Applicant has exhausted the funds in his retirement account (Tr. 60), and he is 
living very frugally. He lives in a friend’s house and contributes to the household 
 
5 
 
 
expenses when he can, but he does not pay rent. His car was damaged in an accident, 
the insurance company paid off the balance due on the car loan, and Applicant has not 
replaced it (Tr. 59). His son dropped out of college because he and his parents could no 
longer afford to pay for his education (Tr. 60). He is dating a woman who is “very good 
with money,” and she has been helping him prepare a budget and apply his limited 
income to his expenses (Tr. 59-60).  
  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
6 
 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised where there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised 
when there is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when 
there is “consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, 
and/or other financial analysis.”  
 
Applicant has a long history of financial problems dating back to about 1995. AG 
¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e) are raised by his financial history, shifting the burden to him to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are recent and frequent. However, many of his financial problems were 
the product of frequent deployments and reassignments, maintaining two households, 
 
7 
 
 
and his ex-wife’s financial irresponsibility. Now that he is retired from the Air Force and 
divorced, these circumstances are not likely to recur. Until he lost his clearance in 
October 2008, he was gainfully employed, had obtained professional assistance with his 
finances, and was executing a realistic plan to regain financial stability. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
Applicant encountered numerous conditions beyond his control: numerous 
deployments and reassignments, his ex-wife’s mismanagement of their finances, a 
divorce, and loss of employment. He did not act responsibly when he first learned that 
his then-wife was mismanaging their finances and spending money irresponsibly. After 
the break-up of his marriage, however, he sought professional help and was well on his 
way to financial stability until he lost his clearance and his income. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
received financial counseling in the Air Force, but it apparently was not effective, 
because his problems persisted even after he retired. More recently, however, he 
engaged the services of a debt-management agency, and his financial problems were 
under control until he lost his clearance and stopped working. At the moment, his 
problems are not being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of each 
and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 
2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. Id. 
 
Applicant had a plan in place and was carrying it out until he lost his clearance. 
His track record as of the date of his personal appearance in August 2008 
 
8 
 
 
demonstrated the good-faith effort required to establish AG ¶ 20(d). He went beyond his 
legal obligations trying to resolve the car repossession debt in SOR ¶ 1.l, even though 
the domestic relations judge found that the debt was solely his ex-wife’s responsibility. I 
am confident that he will resume execution of his plan if he regains his clearance and 
can resuming working for his employer. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the health club debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but he provided no “documented 
proof” of the dispute or evidence of actions to resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He held a security clearance for about 
28 years and SCI access for about 19 years before they were revoked. He also has a 
long history of financial problems dating back to about 1995. He had finally adopted a 
realistic plan to regain his financial health when his clearance was revoked, putting him 
in a Catch-22 situation: he needed his clearance to resolve his financial problems, but 
he could not keep his clearance because of his financial problems.  
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. He cannot work in his 
specialty without a clearance, but the financial impact of losing his clearance is not 
relevant. See ISCR Case No. 02-09220 (App. Bd. Sep. 28, 2004). However, the 
significant steps he took to resolve his financial problems before his clearance was 
 
9 
 
 
revoked are relevant. I am confident that, if he is able to resume his job, he will resolve 
his remaining financial problems.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve doubtful cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to restore his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     For Applicant (withdrawn) 
  Subparagraph 1.l-1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.s:    For Applicant (withdrawn) 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.w:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to restore Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
