                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of:                             ) 
) 
------------------------- )    ISCR Case No. 08-11447  
SSN: ----------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
                                                                             
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application dated June 10, 2008. On 
July 7, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On August 7, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. She admitted all 23 of the 
allegations raised in the SOR, representing an approximate sum of $19,300 in 
delinquent debt, acknowledged a 2003 bankruptcy discharge, and confirmed that her 
monthly expenses exceed her monthly income. She also requested a hearing before a 
DOHA Administrative Judge. I was assigned the case on September 9, 2009. The 
 
2 
 
                                           
parties proposed an October 20, 2009, hearing. A Notice of Hearing was issued to that 
effect on October 7, 2009. 
 
The hearing took place as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony and offered eight 
documents, which I accepted into the record without objection as Exhibits (Exs.) A-H.  
Those materials documented payment of one of the debts at issue and demonstrated 
that payments are being made on the balance owed on another account. Also accepted 
without objection were four documents from Department Counsel, marked as Exs. 1-4. 
Applicant was given through November 6, 2009, to submit any additional materials. 
Applicant timely submitted three additional documents, accepted without objection as 
Exs. I-K. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 28, 2009, and the record was 
closed. Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old advance administrative specialist who has worked for 
the same defense contractor since February 2008. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 
December 2007. With the help of student loans, she is currently pursuing a master’s 
degree.1 Applicant is the mother of four young children and is currently single.  
 
In 1996, when Applicant was 17 years old, she met a man with whom she had a 
baby. The couple lived together until 2000, when they had a second child. In about June 
2000, the man left her. Initially, he did not provide any form of child support. He also left 
her with the bills from jointly-held accounts. Consequently, Applicant had started 
accumulating debts by the time she was 21 years old.   
 
Since then, Applicant has balanced motherhood and college courses with a 
variety of temporary jobs. Most of her temporary jobs were as an administrative 
assistant or a receptionist. While being a “temp” gave her flexibility, it did not provide her 
with health insurance benefits. Lacking health insurance, she was unable to pay for her 
medical expenses. Today, she has a significant amount of delinquent medical debt. 
 
Applicant was in another relationship in 2006 which resulted in a third child. This 
partner was abusive and ultimately abandoned her, leaving her with their joint debts. 
They briefly reconciled in 2008. In January 2009, Applicant was injured and could not 
work from January 2009 through about March 20092. Unable to generate an income, 
she relied on worker’s compensation during her convalescence. Later, Applicant took an 
unpaid absence from work for maternity leave from approximately May 4, 2009, through 
about July 29, 2009. Her partner subsequently abandoned her, again leaving her 
responsible for their jointly-held debts. She is currently unable to locate the father of her 
youngest child. She has not pursued legal action against him to secure child support.  
 
   1 Applicant currently has about $30,000 in student loans. Tr. 24. They are currently deferred. Tr. 76. 
 
   2  Tr. 70. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Over the years, she and her first partner developed an amicable relationship. He 
ultimately gave her some financial assistance. In 2009, this partner, now married to 
another woman, decided to “step up” and “do his fatherly duties.”3 Consequently, in late 
August 2009, he took over physical and financial responsibility for her two older 
children. Applicant retains visitation rights. 
 
Applicant has worked for her current employer for close to two years. She earns 
$16.32 per hour. Both Applicant’s aunt and grandfather provide her with nominal 
financial assistance. The SOR raises, and Applicant admits, allegations based on 
delinquent accounts cited in credit bureau reports from 2009: 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.a – Judgment from about June 2006 for a medical obligation ($1,149). 
UNPAID – Applicant contacted the provider regarding the bill, but never received a 
response. She has not pursued the matter.4 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.b – Collection account for approximately $680. UNPAID. Applicant stated 
that this balance is in repayment, but provided no evidence of payments being made.5 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.c – Medical obligation for about $102. PAID – Applicant paid this debt.6 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.d – An unidentified debt owed to a creditor for approximately $1,364. 
UNPAID. Applicant admitted this debt, but has no idea what it represents.7  
 
Allegation ¶ 1.e – Telecommunications account balance for about $572. UNPAID. 
Applicant has been unable to contact a representative from this company.8 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.f – Medical obligation for about $245. UNPAID. Applicant contacted the 
company and gave it her current health insurance information, but has yet to receive 
any documentation concerning the account.9 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.g – Medical obligation for approximately $149. UNPAID. Applicant 
contacted the company and gave it her current health insurance information, but has yet 
to receive any documentation concerning the account.10 
                                            
   3  Tr. 29. 
 
   4  Tr. 51. 
 
   5  Tr. 52-53. 
 
   6  Ex. H (Statement regarding account ending –7823); Tr. 50. 
 
   7  Tr. 53-54. 
 
   8  Tr. 55. 
 
   9  Id. 
 
   10  Id. at 56. 
 
4 
 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.h – Medical obligation for about $525. UNPAID. Applicant presented no 
evidence that this account has been paid or is otherwise resolved. 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.i – Medical obligation for approximately $298. UNPAID. Applicant 
admitted this debt but does not know what it represents.11 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.j – Collection account for approximately $283. UNPAID. Applicant only 
admitted to this account, which she cannot identify, because she wanted to be complete 
in her answers.12 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.k – Collection account for about $595. UNPAID. Applicant is unable to 
make payments on this account at this time.13 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.l – Charged off account for approximately $1,464. IN REPAYMENT – 
Applicant has been making monthly payments of $50 toward this balance since at least 
August 2009.14 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.m – Charged off account for about $46. UNPAID. Applicant contacted the 
creditor and was told it had no record of a balance owed. She failed to submit evidence 
to that effect.15 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.n – Charged off account for approximately $341. UNPAID. Applicant 
stated her contact with this creditor did not culminate in a repayment schedule.16 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.o – Charged off account for about $3,404. UNPAID. This account is for a 
post-repossession balance on a car which Applicant purchased, but which was in such 
disrepair she could not use it.17 She admits liability and stated that she made contact 
with the creditor, but no progress has been made toward paying the balance. 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.p – Collection account for approximately $180. UNPAID. Applicant failed 
to submit evidence this balance was paid or otherwise resolved.18 
                                                                                                                                             
  
   11 Id. 
 
   12 Id. 
 
   13 Id. at 57. 
 
   14 Ex. E (Payment agreement and schedule), Tr. 41; Ex. K (Renewed schedule); Exs. A-E (Evidence of 
payments). 
 
  15  Tr. 57. 
 
  16  Id. 
 
   17  Tr. 58. 
 
   18  Id. at 60. 
 
5 
 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.q – Collection account for about $144. UNPAID. Applicant contacted this 
creditor, but has yet to receive a follow-up call. She has no recollection as to what this 
balance represents.19 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.r – Medical obligation for approximately $287. UNPAID. Applicant has no 
knowledge of this creditor.20 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.s – Telecommunications collection account for about $1,062. 
RESOLVED. This account balance was included in Applicant 2003 bankruptcy.21  
 
Allegation ¶ 1.t – Medical obligation for approximately $2,359. PAID. Department 
Counsel conceded that this account may match evidence submitted as Ex. F, which 
shows a debt handled by the identified collection entity as paid in full. No direct 
evidence was presented linking the account at issue and the evidence presented.22 
Following the hearing, however, Applicant submitted a newer credit report from October 
2009, Ex. J. The account at issue, opened in 2007, is no longer noted. Inasmuch as the 
account is only about two years old, it is plausible that the account was paid. 
 
Allegation ¶ 1.u – Collection account for a retail obligation of about $4,037. UNPAID. 
Applicant believes this account was included in her bankruptcy, but provided no 
evidence of its inclusion.23 
 
The SOR also notes, and Applicant admits, that as of April 2009, her monthly 
expenses exceed her monthly income.24 Applicant also admits that she filed for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy protection in March 2003 and that her debts were discharged in June 
2003.25 Despite the discharge of her unsecured debts, Applicant again found herself in 
financial difficulty after purchasing a vehicle she could not afford later that year.26 It has 
since been replaced by a car donated to her for her use by a local church. At present, 
however, the vehicle is unreliable and requires repairs.27 Concerned for the safety of 
                                                                                                                                             
 
   19  Id. at 62. 
 
   20  Id. 
 
   21  Tr. 63-64. 
 
   22  Tr. 43-44. 
 
   23  Tr. 65-66. 
 
   24 Allegation ¶ 1.v. 
 
   25 Allegation ¶ 1.w. The filing of bankruptcy and discharge of one’s debts is not, in and of itself, 
disqualifying. 
 
   26 Tr. 67. 
 
   27  Tr. 69. 
 
6 
 
 
assistance.  
there] are and to see what arrangements 
can be made. I’m kind of at a standstill. . . .”35 
is.36 Although her children now have health insurance coverage, 
Applica
    Policies 
                                                                                                                                            
her children, she is hoping to purchase a reliable replacement vehicle when she can 
qualify for credit.28  Applicant currently lives in a property provided through public
29
 
Applicant recently received financial counseling.30 There is no evidence that it 
resulted in any progress on the debts at issue.31 A budget was proposed and Applicant 
was advised to consider filing for bankruptcy again.32 She retained an attorney, but is 
currently unable to pursue this recommendation.33 Her monthly expenses currently 
exceed her income by about $500.34 She has approximately $5 in savings and does not 
maintain a 401k account. Regarding her current financial status, Applicant stated: “I’m 
looking to research further to see what debts [
 
Finally, in addition to Applicant’s three months of unpaid leave and reliance on 
worker’s compensation in the beginning of 2009, as well as her three months of unpaid 
maternity leave in the middle of 2009, Applicant was also out of work for two weeks due 
to a case of meningit
nt does not.37 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. The guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
 
 
   28  Id. 
 
   29  Id. at 70. 
 
   30  Id. at 67. 
  
   31 See, e.g., Tr. 68. 
 
   32 Tr. at 67. 
 
   33 Id. at 68.  
 
   34 Id. at 74. 
 
   35 Id. at 76. In Ex. I (Cover letter to post-hearing submissions) Applicant urges that she “be granted the 
next year to show a pattern of consistency on payment arrangements and improved financial 
responsibility.” Conditional clearances, however, are not available through the process available in 
industrial security cases.  
 
   36 Id. at 71. 
 
   37 Id. at 71-72. 
 
 
7 
 
idered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national 
security.”  
te burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision 
is on the applicant.40  
n as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
protecting such sensitive information.42  The decision to deny an individual a security 
                                           
they are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being cons
 
In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. The 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .”38 The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of 
evidence.39 The ultima
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolatio
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” EO 12968, Section 3.1(b), lists multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information. The Appeal Board has stated that “(t)he clearly 
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.”41 Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant 
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of 
 
   38 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995). 
 
   39 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
   40 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
   41 Id. 
 
   42 Id. 
 
 
8 
 
clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.43 It is 
merely an indication that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and 
the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find the following adjudicative 
guideline to be the most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case: 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations. The Concern: Failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.44  
 
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those that would mitigate security 
concerns, are set forth and discussed in the conclusions below. 
 
 Analysis 
 
Applicant’s debts were discharged through bankruptcy in 2003. Since that time, 
newly acquired debts have also become delinquent. Therefore, Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) 
apply. With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to Appellant to overcome the case 
against her and mitigate security concerns.  
 
In 2003, Applicant’s former debts were discharged through bankruptcy. Since 
then, Applicant accumulated more delinquent debts because her expenses exceeded 
her income, she lacked medical insurance, and she experienced periods of leave 
without pay. Today, her expenses continue to exceed her income, she still lacks 
medical insurance, and she was on leave without pay for over half of this year due to 
medical issues. Unless or until Applicant gets a position with health coverage or can 
otherwise learn to live within her means, there is no indication that either her current 
financial situation will improve or that she will be able to expeditiously address her 
delinquent debt. Therefore, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) partially applies.   
 
For several years, the father of Applicant’s older children failed to provide 
financial assistance. The location of the father of her youngest children, who provides 
no child support, is unknown. Moreover, health issues forced her to stay home from her 
temporary position and precluded her from generating income. Therefore, Financial 
                                            
   43 Executive Order 10865 § 7. 
 
   44 AG ¶ 18. 
 
9 
 
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in 
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. 
 
Although Applicant received financial counselling, there is no evidence that 
counseling has helped her resolve her delinquent debts. At most, it motivated her to 
consider another bankruptcy. Therefore, FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control) does not apply. 
 
Of the 21 delinquent debts at issue, Applicant provided evidence that one debt 
has been paid and one is in repayment. The evidence tends to show that one account 
was addressed by her 2003 bankruptcy discharge. Remaining unaddressed are 18 
debts. While there is testimony regarding attempts to contact or negotiate with creditors, 
no documentary evidence regarding these efforts was submitted. Because some efforts 
have been exerted to honor these debts, FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies to a 
limited extent.  
 
Applicant stated that although she admitted all allegations, she cannot identify 
some of the accounts at issue. Although she may dispute some of these accounts, she 
provided no evidence that she has formally disputed them with any of the credit 
reporting bureaus and failed to offer any documentation tending to substantiate the 
basis of her dispute. Consequently, FC MC AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue) does not apply. Moreover, FC MC AG ¶ 20(f) 
(the affluence resulted from a legal source of income) is not applicable. 
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve, or at least address, her delinquent debts and her overall financial 
condition. Today, Applicant continues to expend more than she earns and she is not 
even financially capable of pursuing another bankruptcy filing. She admits that she is 
currently “at a standstill” with regard to her finances. Given these circumstances, I am 
not convinced Applicant’s limited evidence mitigates security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. In reviewing the complete record, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person” factors noted 
above.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible young woman. Multiple factors speak in her favor. 
She has devoted her surplus time and energy to being a good single mother. She 
successfully persevered in both college and graduate school while balancing work and 
a growing family. Consequently, Applicant is preparing to transition from “temp” work to 
more permanent, professional employment. She renewed her friendship with the father 
of her older children, who recently assumed responsibility for his children. As a result, 
those children now benefit from the guidance of both parents while Applicant can benefit 
from an increase in her available income. Moreover, Applicant no longer maintains 
contact with the father of her two youngest children, a man she describes as abusive.  
 
 While Applicant must be admired for her academic success in light of her 
growing maternal obligations, multiple factors speak against her with regard to her 
finances. The freedom from debt she received with her 2003 bankruptcy discharge was 
short lived. A 2003 car purchase immediately put her back on the road to indebtedness. 
Rather than temporarily postpone her achievement of a master’s degree and pursue a 
permanent position which offered health insurance, she continued with her “temp” work 
and acquired more student loan debt and more medical debt. Applicant continued to 
accrue debt and spend more money than she earned for about five years before she 
sought financial counseling. By the time she received such counseling, her debt was 
such that she was advised to again seek bankruptcy. She has been less than diligent in 
seeking court-ordered child support. Finally, she failed to submit any additional 
documents that could substantiate her efforts on some of the debts at issue despite the 
fact the record was kept open for over two weeks following the hearing. 
 
Applicant has made some progress toward addressing her debt. That progress, 
however, has been minimal. She presented no evidence of a budget designed to 
address her delinquent debt and her approach toward addressing her debt does not 
reflect a coordinated effort. Short of another bankruptcy filing, which she is financially 
unable to complete at this time, Applicant failed to articulate any alternative solutions for 
addressing her debt. In light of these facts, she failed to mitigate security concerns 
regarding her finances. It is worth repeating, however, that an adverse determination 
does not speak ill of Applicant or her loyalty. It merely indicates that in presenting her 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
case, she failed to meet the strict guidelines involved in this process and the standards 
expected of one seeking a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.w:   For Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR. 
Administrative Judge 
