                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00847 
SSN: ------------------ ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 22, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On June 12, 2009, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 12, 2009. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
On August 3, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on August 3, 2009. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on 
August 11, 2009. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30-day time 
allowed that would have expired on September 10, 2009. I received the case 
assignment on October 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR.  He explained that his 
delinquent debts listed in Paragraph 1 were current or paid, and the failure to disclose 
his financial delinquencies in the SF 86, as alleged in Paragraph 2, was an “oversight.” 
 
Applicant is 52 years old and married. He works for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for this employer since June 2008. (Items 2 and 4)  
 
The SOR lists eight delinquent debts. These debts total $24,955. The earliest 
delinquency date is 2003. Applicant’s Answer states his credit card debt of $1,644 is 
current (subparagraph 1.a);his mortgage payment of $1,000 is current (subparagraph 
1.b); his two loan debts to the same creditor of $4,015 and $5,201 are current 
(subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d); his bank debt payment of $48 is paid and the account is 
repaid (subparagraph 1.e); his bank debt of $5,927 is current (subparagraph 1.f); his 
debt to a large department store chain of $2,100 is current (subparagraph 1.g); and his 
$5,000 debt on a military credit is current (subparagraph 1.h).  Applicant did not submit 
any documents to verify that his Answers were supported by objective financial 
evidence. The credit reports from October 11, 2008, and May 28, 2009, list all these 
delinquent debts as due and owing. (Items 6-9)  
 
Applicant was sent two sets of interrogatories asking for further information on 
his delinquent debts. The March 18, 2009, interrogatories requested information about a 
debt consolidation loan Applicant stated he obtained six years ago. Applicant did not 
disclose the requested information about the debts included in the loan or proof that his 
payments were current on that loan. Applicant also failed to provide copies of canceled 
checks paying these delinquent debts, recent statements from creditors, verification of 
all sources of income, and other items requested in the interrogatories.  Applicant did 
provide a personal financial statement. This statement showed Applicant has a net 
remainder income monthly of $1,051.16, and owned two late model expensive 
automobiles. It did not list the individual delinquent debts as set forth in the SOR or their 
current status. The personal financial statement did refer to an attachment concerning a 
“debt consolidation” debt in the amount of $11,265.52. However, there was no 
attachment to Applicant’s personal financial statement which explained the “debt 
consolidation” debt. Applicant has not provided any documents verifying the current 
status of his delinquent debts. (Items 6-9)  
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
Applicant answered the SF 86 Question 28, subsections (a) and (b), with “No” 
responses on September 22, 2008. Question 28.a asked Applicant if he had been more 
than 180 days delinquent on any debt in the past seven years. Question 28.b inquired if 
Applicant currently was delinquent more than 90 days on any debt. Applicant admitted 
the allegations in subparagraph 2.a of the SOR, but claimed it was a mere “oversight” 
that he did not answer the questions with full disclosure of his delinquent debts. 
Applicant certified at the end of the SF 86 that his answers to all questions, including 
Question 28, are “true, complete, and correct to the best of” his knowledge. His answers 
were not true and correct as they pertain to his delinquent debts. (Items 2, 4) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
 
 
 
 
4
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2003 to the present, Applicant accumulated eight delinquent debts totaling 
$24,955 that are unpaid or unresolved. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions have any 
applicability because Applicant continuously and deliberately failed to provide any 
requested documentation except his personal financial statement. That document did 
not show that he resolved by any means the specific debts set forth in the SOR. He did 
not meet his burden of proof to show he resolved his delinquent debts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct:   
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms 
or releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; 
and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness 
determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven disqualifying conditions under the Personal Conduct 
guideline. One of them could raise a security concern and be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant did not disclose his financial delinquencies. Applicant admitted the 
allegations as set forth in subparagraph 2.a of the SOR. Then, in his Answer he claims 
it was a mere oversight on his part when he did not make the requested disclosure.  
When compared to his lack of disclosure in the interrogatories, his explanation is not 
persuasive or believable.  
 
In AG ¶ 17 seven mitigating conditions are listed. After a careful review of the 
facts, I conclude none of them apply to Applicant’s case. Reviewing those conditions, I 
compared them to the facts in this case.  I concluded Applicant did not make a prompt 
and good-faith effort to disclose he debts.  His lack of disclosure was not done on the 
advice of counsel. These omissions are not minor or infrequent. Applicant has not taken 
 
 
 
 
 
6
steps to reduce vulnerability to coercion, nor obtained counseling to relieve stress or 
change his behavior on this issue. The information about his delinquent debts is 
substantiated. There is no relevance to the mitigating condition about association with 
persons involved in criminal activities. Therefore, none of the seven mitigating 
conditions have any relevance or applicability to Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He was an adult when asked to disclose information about the 
debts. He has not disclosed any persuasive objective documentary evidence to address 
each of the delinquent debts specifically listed in the SOR. He ignored repeated 
requests in the interrogatories submitted to him to supply such proof. Furthermore, he 
failed to disclose his delinquent debts in answering Question 28 on the SF 86.  
Applicant shows a pattern of refusing to disclose his delinquent debts in the SF 86 and 
in his uninformative responses to the two interrogatories sent to him. He seeks a 
security clearance from the government, but will not cooperate and provide requested 
information.  
 
What action, if any, Applicant has taken to resolve his delinquent debt is not 
known from the available evidence. His refusal to answer questions about these matters 
leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on the 
magnitude of his financial obligations and his desire for secrecy. His lack of action 
continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his 
past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts while 
purchasing two expensive late-model cars. Applicant now compounds his predicament 
 
 
 
 
 
7
by willfully refusing to disclose financial information the government needs to make an 
informed decision on his security clearance request. The burden of proof is on Applicant 
to show why the mitigating conditions under both guidelines should apply to him.  He 
failed in that effort.  Any doubt is resolved against him and in favor of national security, 
in accordance with the Directive ¶ E2.2.2.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. He did not mitigate the security concerns under the guideline 
for Personal Conduct. I conclude the “whole- person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
