 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01454 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) G, Alcohol Consumption. For reasons discussed in the 
body of this decision, I conclude that drafting flaws obscured the substance of the 
security concerns alleged under AG J, Criminal Conduct.  Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on October 10, 2008. On June 10, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under AG G, Alcohol Involvement and AG J, Criminal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On July 22, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that his 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. On August 26, 2009, the 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 8.  By letter dated August 27, 2009, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
August 31, 2009. His response was due on September 30, 2009. He did not file 
additional information within the required time period. On November 3, 2009, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
     Procedural Matters 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a. alleges that disqualifying conduct alleged under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Involvement, as “set forth in subparagraphs 1.a-1.f. above” also constitutes disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The SOR lists five, and not six, 
allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline G. Accordingly, sua sponte, I 
amend the SOR allegation at ¶ 2.a. by deleting the reference to SOR subparagraph 1.f., 
which does not exist.       
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG G, Alcohol 
Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) and one allegation of disqualifying conduct 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the five Guideline G allegations and did not respond to the Guideline J 
allegation. Applicant’s admissions of the five Guideline G allegations are admitted 
herein as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item  3.) 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old, never married, and employed as a business analyst by 
a federal contractor. In 2006, he received a Bachelor of Science degree in Financial 
Services. He has worked for his current employer since October 2008. He has not 
previously held a security clearance.  (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was in high school. He attended 
college from August 2002 until his graduation in May 2006. In April 2003, while an 
underage college student, he was cited for A Minor in Possession of a Malt Beverage. 
He appeared in court with an attorney his parents hired to represent him. He was fined 
and sentenced to 24 hours of community service. (SOR ¶ 1.a.; Item 5 at 6.) 
 
 In June 2004, Applicant was still not old enough to legally purchase alcohol. 
However, he purchased a case of beer and, to complete the transaction, provided the 
clerk with a picture identification card that falsified his date of birth to show that he was 
of legal age to purchase alcohol. He was stopped by police, who impounded the case of 
beer, and cited him with Minor in Possession of Alcoholic (Malt) Beverage. He was 
sentenced to 32 hours of community service and paid a fine. After he completed the 
community service and paid the required fine, the charge was dismissed. (Item 5 at 7.) 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleged in ¶ 1.b. that Applicant was charged with Obtain Alcohol with 
False Driver’s License. Although Applicant admitted he used a false driver’s license to 
purchase alcohol in June 2004, the record establishes that the only citation issued to 
him at that time was Minor in Possession of Alcoholic (Malt) Beverage. (Item 5 at 6-8.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from college in May 2006. After graduation, he held a variety 
of jobs. From January 2007 until July 2008, he was employed as an accounting 
coordinator with a government contractor. In June 2007, he was arrested and charged 
with Driving While Intoxicated (DWI). He was found guilty of a reduced charge of 
Reckless Driving and sentenced to 30 days in jail (suspended). Additionally, he paid a 
fine of $300, plus court costs, was directed to take an alcohol education program, and 
his driver’s license was suspended for six months. (SOR ¶ 1.c.; Item 3; Item 5 at 2; Item 
7; Item 8.) 
 
 In August 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with (I) Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol and (II) Driving with a Blood Alcohol Content of 0.08% or Higher. 
Applicant pled No Contest to Count I and was fined $1,912. Charge II was stricken. 
Applicant’ driver’s license was suspended from November 19, 2008 through January 9, 
2009. He was placed on five years of summary probation, ordered to complete nine 
days of public service, attend a one-time Mothers Against Drunk Driving victim impact 
panel presentation, and complete a nine-month alcohol education program. In April 
2009, his alcohol education counselor reported that he was attending the alcohol 
education program as required. (SOR ¶ 1.d.; Item 6 at 2, 5-15, 17; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant drinks alcohol to lose his inhibitions and to improve his social contacts 
with others. He reports that when he drinks alcohol, he becomes happy and more 
sociable. He denies that his use of alcohol raises behavioral problems that would 
require him to stop alcohol use. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
reported that he drank beer two to three times a month. On those occasions, he drinks 
three to eight 12-ounce cans of beer. He drinks to intoxication “once every month or 
two.” He intends to continue to drink alcoholic beverages. (SOR ¶ 1.e.; Item 5 at 5; Item 
6  at 1-2.)       
 
 Applicant’s two alcohol–related arrests were reported in October 2008 by the 
Criminal Justice Information Services Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI). (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant did not respond to the Criminal Conduct allegation of the SOR. No 
reason is given in the record for his lack of response. 
 
 As noted under Procedural Matters, supra., SOR allegation 2.a referenced one 
allegation (SOR ¶ 1.f.) that did not exist as a SOR allegation under Guideline G.  
Additionally, allegation 2.a. alleged that all Guideline G allegations constituted criminal 
conduct under Guideline J. As previously noted in this decision, there was insufficient 
record evidence to establish that Applicant was charged with Obtain Alcohol With False 
Driver’s License, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Moreover, in allegation 2.a., the Government 
 
4 
 
 
alleged under Guideline J that Applicant’s use of alcohol and his enrollment in an 
alcohol education program, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e., constituted criminal conduct.   
 
 Section 3(1) of Enclosure 1 of the Directive requires that an Applicant be 
provided “[a] written statement of reasons why his access authorization may be denied 
or revoked, which shall be as comprehensive and detailed as the national security 
permits.” 
 
 Section E3.1.3. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive states, in pertinent part: “An 
unfavorable clearance decision shall not be made unless the applicant has been 
provided with a written SOR that shall be as detailed and comprehensive as the national 
security permits.” 
 
 Section E3.1.4. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive states, in pertinent part: “The 
applicant must submit a detailed written answer to the SOR under oath or affirmation 
that shall admit or deny each listed allegation. A general denial or other similar answer 
is insufficient.” 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions.  I 
have especially considered AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  AG ¶ 
22(c) reads: “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent.”   
 
6 
 
 
In 2003 and 2004, Applicant was cited for possession of alcohol as a minor. In 
2007 and 2008, he was arrested for alcohol-related driving offenses. His most recent 
alcohol-related driving offense occurred fifteen months ago, in August 2008. He is a 
habitual consumer of alcohol. He drinks to intoxication “once every month or two.” 
Nothing in the record suggests he has been diagnosed as an abuser of alcohol or as 
alcohol dependent. However, despite two arrests for driving under the influence of 
alcohol, he continues to drink alcohol and intends to drink alcohol in the future. He has 
participated in alcohol awareness education, and he is presumably aware of the serious 
consequences to himself and to others of driving under the influence of alcohol. These 
facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant is now 25 years old. He admitted alcohol-related conduct in high 
school, in college, and as a post-college professional. His most recent arrest for driving 
under the influence of alcohol occurred in August 2008 and is therefore recent. He has 
participated in alcohol awareness education. He has not been diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent or as an alcohol abuser. He continues to drink alcohol to intoxication, and he 
intends to drink alcohol in the future. Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline 
G mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Section 3(1) of Enclosure 1 of the Directive requires that the Government provide 
an applicant with a written SOR which is “as comprehensive and detailed as the 
national security permits.” Additionally, Section E 3.1.4. of Enclosure 3 requires an 
applicant to “submit a detailed written answer to the SOR under oath or affirmation that 
shall admit or deny each listed allegation.”  
 
 In the SOR, the Government alleged that all of the Guideline G allegations also 
constituted criminal conduct under Guideline J. While Applicant answered the Guideline 
G allegations in the SOR, he did not answer the Guideline J allegation, and no reason 
was provided for his failure to do so. However, the Government’s Guideline J allegation 
was poorly framed, inaccurate, and misleading, three reasons why an applicant 
untrained in legal proceedings and pleadings might find it confusing, intimidating, and 
difficult or impossible to answer. 
  
 Section E3.1.3. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive states that “an unfavorable 
clearance decision shall not be made unless the applicant has been provided with a 
written SOR that shall be as detailed and comprehensive as the national security 
permits.” 
 
 The SOR in this case provided Applicant with detailed and comprehensive 
information supporting the Guideline G allegations, and Applicant provided written 
answers to all Guideline G allegations. However, the Government failed to provide 
Applicant with coherent and detailed information sufficient to establish an allegation of 
criminal conduct under Guideline J. Accordingly, I conclude the Guideline J allegation in 
this case for Applicant. 
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young adult who is 
well educated and skilled. His employer has entrusted him with fiduciary and analytic 
responsibilities. 
 
At the same time, Applicant has been arrested twice for driving a vehicle while 
under the influence of alcohol. After his first arrest in 2007, he was ordered to take a 
course in alcohol education. Even after being made aware of the dangers of drinking 
and driving, he was again arrested for driving under the influence in 2008. He continues 
to drink alcohol and drinks to intoxication once every one or two months. Applicant’s 
conduct raises questions about his current trustworthiness and reliability.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his   
alcohol consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                       Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. through 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
