1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-00647
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF86) on March 28, 2008.
On July 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) noting security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
In a notarized response dated August 6, 2009, Applicant admitted five and
denied seven of the Guideline F allegations set forth in the SOR, but did not address
the allegation raised under Guideline E. She requested a decision be made without a
hearing. Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material (FORM), dated
August 28, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on September 8, 2009, but declined to
file a response to its contents. On November 2, 2009, the Director, DOHA, forwarded
 Response to the SOR at 2.      1
 FORM, Item 11 (Investigator’s Notes, dated Jun. 27, 2008 – Jul. 2, 2008).      2
 FORM, Item 12 (Investigator’s Notes, dated Oct. 3, 208, – Oct. 28, 2008).      3
Response to the SOR at 1.      4
2
the case for assignment to an administrative judge for administrative determination. I
was assigned the case that day. Based upon a review of the case file, submissions,
and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden regarding the security concerns
raised under Guideline F and Guideline E. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old mail clerk who has worked for the same defense
contractor since 2007. She earned a high school diploma in 1999. Currently single, she
has an 11-year old child. In choosing an administrative determination without hearing,
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. Because her submissions are brief, the
facts of record are exceptionally scant. 
In 2004, Applicant was assaulted and stabbed by a former boyfriend. Her injuries
precluded her from employment for about two years. In 2005 or 2006, Applicant broke
an apartment lease. The apartment owner pursued a judgment against her in the
amount of approximately $2,500 in 2006. She satisfied the judgment in 2007 or 2008.1
Also in 2006, she committed an act constituting welfare fraud. After paying restitution in
the amount of $850 in September 2007, Applicant pled guilty to the charge.  2
Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant incurred medical bills when she suffered
from pneumonia. She could not pay the bills and the illness prevented her from working
for an unspecified period. She told investigators in 2008 that she had made
arrangements to pay her medical debts.  In her 2009 response to the SOR, however,3
she denied the debts, stating she had been “enrolled in [a] medical insurance plan at
the time [the] cost [was] incurred. All costs should be covered by medical insurance.”4
No explanation was made as to why she changed her position regarding the resolution
of these delinquent debts and no evidence of coverage was submitted. During her
illness, Applicant also became delinquent on one or more telephone accounts. She told
investigators in October 2008 that she planned to pay the balance or balances in
November 2008. The balances referenced in the SOR remain unpaid.
On February 28, 2008, Applicant completed a SF86. In response to a question
inquiring as to whether she ever had been over 180 days delinquent on any accounts or
was currently 90 days delinquent on any debts, Applicant answered “No.” 
As of October 2008, Applicant had a gross income of approximately $35,000.
Her bi-weekly net income was approximately $1,300. She did not receive child support,
disability, or retirement. Her monthly expenses included a cell phone for about $110,
 FORM, Item 12 (Investigator’s Notes, dated Oct. 3, 208, – Oct. 28, 2008) at 4.      5
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      6
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      8
3
clothes and food for her child amounting to about $200, clothes and food for herself
totaling about $150, entertainment expenses of approximately $60, and about $150 a
month toward repayment of misused food stamps. Amounting to about $670, Applicant
should have about $630 leftover each month. Applicant has no assets, real estate, or
investments. She described her financial situation as “good.”  The record does not5
reflect her current financial status. There is no indication that she received financial
counseling or is in repayment on any of her remaining delinquent debts.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common
sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” An administrative judge must
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (government) must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted
by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something6
less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the7
applicant.  8
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      9
information).
 Id.      10
 Id.      11
 EO 10865 § 7.      12
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.      13
4
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security9
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any10
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to11
deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the
loyalty of an applicant.  Nor does it reflect badly on that person’s character. It is merely12
an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) to be the most pertinent to the
case. Conditions pertaining to these adjudicative guidelines that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The Directive sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions under13
this guideline. Here, Applicant admits some of the dozen delinquent debts cited in the
SOR. While she denies the majority of the remaining debts at issue, she only offered
evidence that one of those debts, the obligation noted at SOR allegation ¶ 1.e, was
addressed or paid. Consequently, both Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition
5
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and ¶ 19(c) (a history of
not meeting obligations) apply.
For an unspecified time between 2004 and 2006, Applicant could not work due
to injuries sustained in an attack by her ex-boyfriend. She was also unable to work
during an unspecified time between 2006 and 2007 owing to a case of pneumonia.
Because the periods of her incapacity are undefined, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (“the conditions that resulted in the behavior
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances”) applies to a limited extent.
Applicant admitted $530 in debts, referencing SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.f – 1.h for
$217, $204, and $109, respectively. Although she noted that the allegations set forth in
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.k – 1.1 for $217 and $204, respectively, are duplicative of the
allegations noted at ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g., she provided no evidence linking the two. Given the
similarity in entries, however, this conclusion appears to be correct. Therefore, in
identifying the entries as duplicates, SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.k – 1.1 have been
constructively addressed. Additionally, Applicant provided evidence that she satisfied
the debt owed to her former apartment complex. That debt is noted at SOR allegation ¶
1.e, referencing a sum of approximately $729. 
Remaining at issue are delinquent debts amounting to about $9,850. Although
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e and 1.i, no evidence
that the medical debts at issue were ever covered by insurance or that the other
accounts were paid, are in repayment, or were formally disputed was submitted.
Although the 2004 attack on Applicant was an extraordinary event and her need
for recuperation unexpected, the debts still at issue are multiple in number and remain
largely unaddressed. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a)
(“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) does not apply.
There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is no
evidence that she followed through on any of the payments she told investigators she
intended to make in 2008, nor is there evidence that she formally disputed any of the
delinquent debts she denies with any of the credit reporting agencies. No
documentation was submitted showing that she had medical insurance when her
medical debts were incurred or that a medical insurer either assumed or paid the
obligations. With the exception of the duplicative telecommunication bills noted above
and the rental lease related debt noted in SOR allegation ¶ 1.e, there is no evidence
any of the remaining obligations have been addressed. Consequently, neither FC MC
AG ¶ 20(c) (“the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”) nor
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts”) applies. The facts provide some mitigation for the creation
 AG ¶ 15.      14
6
of the debts at issue, but fail to mitigate her failure to address the majority of the debts
at issue. Security concerns remain unmitigated.
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Under Guideline E “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  When Applicant completed her SF86, she had multiple delinquent14
accounts. In completing that form, she denied having any delinquent debts. This is
sufficient to initially raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 16(a) (deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities). 
A denial that one has delinquent debts is not self-evident proof that one
deliberately provided a misleading or false answer. Here, however, Applicant totally
failed to address the allegation raised and declined a hearing on the record. With no
facts upon which the applicable mitigating conditions can be considered, security
concerns remain unmitigated.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
                                                                                                               
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary;
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the scant facts available concerning this case, as well as the “whole person” factors.
Applicant is a 29-year-old mail clerk who endured difficult times in the early to mid-
2000s. She was the victim of a brutal attack and suffered from pneumonia. As a
consequence of both, she was unable to work for unspecified periods. Although she
declined to submit any current financial information, she described her financial
condition as of late 2008 as “good.” While “good,” there is no evidence she applies any
of the approximately $650 leftover each month toward her delinquent debts. Nor is
there an explanation as to why she failed to make the payments she told investigators
she intended to make in 2008. Finally, she presented no plan depicting how she intends
to address the nearly $10,000 in delinquent debt remaining at issue. As for personal
conduct security concerns, Applicant failed to provide any explanation as to why she
denied having delinquent debts when she completed her SF86.
The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a determination as
to an applicant‘s loyalty. Nor does it reflect badly on that person’s character. It merely
indicates an applicant failed to meet the strict guidelines established for issuing a
clearance. In choosing a determination without a hearing, and in failing to submit more
information, Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
