1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02450
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 4, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On May 22, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant (Item 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, on June 18, 2009 (Item 4).
He requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
2
On August 31, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department's written
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant, and he was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on October 9, 2009.
Applicant submitted additional evidence in the form of two letters, which have been
identified and entered into evidence collectively as Item A. In the FORM, Department
Counsel offered seven documentary exhibits, which have been entered into evidence as
Items 1 through 7. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on October 15,
2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including the
FORM, Applicant's RSOR and the other admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 39 years old. He works for a defense contractor as a manufacturing
engineer, and he seeks a Department of Defense security clearance in connection with
his employment in the defense sector.
(Guideline F- Financial Considerations)
The SOR lists 16 allegations (1.a. through 1.p.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations except
1.a. and 1.g. (Item 3). All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as they
were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $7,780. Applicant
denied this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), because he claimed that he did not recognize the
name of the lender. Items 6 and 7 establish that this debt is owed by Applicant, and no
evidence has been introduced to prove that this debt has been disputed or otherwise
resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,601. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. Item A includes a letter, which confirms that Applicant is
enrolled in a debt settlement program. However, no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,263. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,925. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
3
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,753. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,890. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $99. Applicant denied
this debt in his RSOR (Item 3). No evidence has been introduced to establish that this
debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $11,050. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,033. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,732. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,942, with a
balance of $282,000. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that
he has been working with a mortgage bailout agent to try modify this home loan. Item A
includes a letter, which confirms that there is an attempt being made to negotiate a loan
modification on this home loan. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.l. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,675, with a balance
of $69,212. Applicant admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that the
mortgage bailout agent is also attempting to modify this home loan. However, no
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that
this debt has not been paid. 
1.m. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,065. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
4
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.n. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $10,324. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.o. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $11,029. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.p. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,617. Applicant
admitted this debt in his RSOR (Item 3), but stated that this debt has been placed with a
“legal consolidation” agency. However, no evidence has been introduced to establish
that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
5
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts totaling at least $86,778. Regarding the Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) under Guideline F, I conclude both DC 19. (a) and DC 19. (c) apply,
because of Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to satisfy his debts, and his long history
of not meeting financial obligations.
While Applicant submitted evidence that he has begun working with two different
organizations to attempt to resolve these debts, there has been no evidence submitted
to show that any of these debts have been settled or even reduced. Additionally, there
was no explanation given by Applicant as to how his financial difficulties occurred, or
what he has done so that he will not find himself in this situation in the future. Therefore,
I cannot find that any Mitigating Condition is applicable. I hold Guideline F against
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
6
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guideline F, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on
all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s history of financial difficulties and
his failure to resolve the overdue debts, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against  Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
