                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00801 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on October 2, 2008, as part of his employment with a defense contractor. On 
April 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F, and personal conduct under Guideline E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Since Applicant was serving overseas when the 
SOR was issued, he did not acknowledge receipt of the SOR until June 2, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 3, 2009. He denied all allegations 
under both Guideline E and Guideline F. Applicant did not request a hearing. On July 1, 
2009, Department Counsel requested a hearing (Hearing Exhibit 1). The case was 
assigned to me on July 24, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 13, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
2009, for a hearing on September 3, 2009. Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on 
August 24, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
five exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on his behalf. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit documents in support of his position. Applicant timely submitted 
three documents, marked App. Ex. A through C. Department Counsel had no objection 
to admission of the documents (Gov. Ex. 6). The documents were admitted into the 
record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 10, 2009. 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on August 24, 2009. Applicant is 
entitled to 15 days notice of hearing (Directive E3.1.8). Applicant discussed with 
Department Counsel the hearing date of September 3, 2009, prior to the mailing of the 
Notice of Hearing. Accordingly, actual notice was given more than 15 days prior to the 
hearing. However, Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing only 11 days prior to the 
hearing. He waived the 15 days notice requirement (Tr. 6). 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR at hearing to add an additional 
allegation under Guideline E for falsification of his e-QIP by failing to note a truck 
repossession in the last seven years. The motion was denied since Department 
Counsel had adequate time to amend the SOR before the hearing and he had not 
notified Applicant prior to the hearing of the intended amendment to the SOR (Tr. 11-
12). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old field service representative mechanic working on 
military vehicles for a defense contractor since September 2008. Prior to working for the 
defense contractor, Applicant was a self-employed truck driver and an automobile 
mechanic. He is married with three children, two still at home. Applicant is presently 
receiving workman's compensation of $4,800 monthly. His wife is also employed and 
contributes about $1,600 monthly to the family income, for a total monthly income of 
approximately $6,400. Their monthly expenses are about $5,700, leaving about $700 to 
$800 in monthly discretionary funds (Tr. 33-34, 43-44; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated October 
2, 2008). 
 
Credit reports and Applicant's admission show a charged off debt for a truck 
repossession of $14,402 (SOR 1.a). His personal financial statement provided to 
security investigators on March 16, 2009, showed a monthly negative remainder of 
 
3 
 
 
funds after expenses of $202 (SOR 1.b; Gov. 4, Credit report, dated March 3, 2009; 
Gov. Ex. 5, Credit report, dated October 15, 2008).  
 
In early 2008, Applicant believed he could enter the business of transporting cars 
to and from car auctions for local automobile dealers. He had heard from others that the 
business would be profitable. Applicant had worked for many years as an automobile 
mechanic and knew a number of people in the automobile industry in the area. He 
believed he would have sufficient business to make a profit. Applicant did not present 
any information to show he conducted a meaningful evaluation of the profitability of this 
type of business. Applicant purchased a truck for $40,000 in February 2008. Within a 
short time, the price of fuel increased and Applicant realized he could not make a profit 
in the business. Applicant's last payment on the truck was in April 2008. In May 2008, 
Applicant voluntarily returned the truck to the dealer prior to the due date for his monthly 
payment. Applicant still owed over $35,000 for the truck. The truck was sold at auction 
for $21,000 leaving Applicant still owing the creditor $14,402 (Tr. 26-27; 44-47). 
 
Applicant did not immediately receive information from the creditor about the 
auction of the truck or the amount he may still owe on the truck loan. He started working 
for the defense contractor in September 2008, and completed his security clearance 
application in October 2008. He was sent to Iraq by his employer to work on military 
vehicles in December 2008. Shortly after arrival in Iraq, Applicant learned from his wife 
that the creditor had advised them of the auction price received for the truck and the 
debt still owed of $14,402. Applicant knew he would have a debt from the auction of the 
truck. However, since the truck had less than 2,000 miles on it, he thought the truck sale 
would be for at least $30,000, leaving him with a debt of about $5,000 (Tr. 42-50).  
 
Applicant was injured on the job in Iraq in March 2009 and returned home to the 
United States. He is receiving workman's compensation for that injury. After returning 
home, Applicant contacted the creditor on the truck loan in May 2009 to seek an 
agreement for payment of the debt. The creditor offered a lump sum payment option of 
$9,000 that Applicant was unable to pay. He offered to pay $100 per month until the 
debt was satisfied. The creditor rejected the offer. Applicant sent a $100 payment to the 
creditor after the hearing in September 2009 (Tr. 32-34, 38-39, 56-57; App. Ex. A, 
Applicant's letter, undated; App. Ex. B, Money order receipt, dated September 14, 2009; 
App. Ex. C, Settlement notice, dated September 8, 2009). 
 
Applicant completed a personal financial statement in response to interrogatories 
on March 16, 2009. He had just returned from Iraq after being injured. His pay has been 
reduced from what he earned in Iraq. He listed his net monthly salary as $3,244 with 
monthly expenses of $3,446, leaving a negative monthly remainder of $202. He did not 
list any income for his wife. Shortly after completing the financial statement, Applicant 
started drawing unemployment and his income increased. His wife is also employed 
and contributes to the family income. He now has a net remainder of a positive $700 to 
$800 (Tr. 32-33, 43-44; Gov. Ex. 2, Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 16, 2009). 
 
 
4 
 
 
In 1989, Applicant was convicted and sentenced for obtaining property by false 
pretense (SOR 2.a; Gov. Ex. 3, Federal Bureau of Investigation Criminal Justice 
Report). Applicant responded "NO' to question 28(a) on his October 2008 security 
clearance application asking if he had debts more than 180 days past due in the last 
seven years, and question 28(b) asking if he had any present debts more than 90 days 
past due (SOR 2.b; Gov. Ex. 4, Credit report, dated March 3, 2009; Gov. Ex. 5, Credit 
report, dated October 15, 2008).  
 
Applicant worked for an automobile dealer and repair business in 1989. Part of 
his job was to purchase parts needed to repair cars at his employer's business using an 
open account with the parts distributors. Applicant admitted using the open account to 
purchase automobile parts not intended for his use by his employer. He was sentenced 
to a year confinement, which was suspended, and a $2,000 fine. He paid the fine and 
completed the period of suspension. He has no other criminal charges or actions (Tr. 
55-56). 
 
Applicant did not list the truck repossession on the e-QIP because he believed 
that his truck had not been repossessed since he turned it in voluntarily. After he 
returned the truck to the dealer/creditor, Applicant knew he may owe some money on 
the truck if the sale of the truck did not cover the amount owed. At the time he 
completed the e-QIP in October 2008, he did not know if he owed money on the truck or 
how much. He did not know he had a debt more than 180 days past due or presently 
more than 90 days past due. Since the truck was repossessed in May 2008 and he 
completed the security clearance application in October 2008, 180 days had not passed 
so he could not have been delinquent on a loan for more than 180 days. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are still requiredl in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent strong evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debt from a loan for a truck as listed on credit reports 
and admitted by Applicant is a security concern raising Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), 
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant 
completed a personal financial statement shortly after returning early from Iraq because 
of an injury. His pay was reduced, and he had not had time to adjust his expenses to his 
 
6 
 
 
new lower income. He also did not include his wife's salary on the financial history. 
Applicant demonstrated that his pay has increased since he is now receiving workman's 
compensation and his wife contributes to the family income. He has a net positive 
remainder each month. His present personal finances do not have a negative monthly 
remainder. Applicant's present income and expense ratio are not now a security 
concern.  
 
 I considered the Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) raised 
by Applicant's testimony. FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was 
so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) 
does not apply. Applicant has an outstanding debt of $14,402 on a truck loan. The debt 
arose in May 2008 and has not been paid. It arose because Applicant's business 
venture did not provide the income he anticipated and his expenses were more than 
anticipated.   
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant purchased a truck to 
enter a new line of business to haul cars to and from auctions. Within two months, he 
realized that the business would not be profitable. Part of the reason was the increase 
in fuel prices. Applicant entered the new business without carefully analysis of what it 
would take to make the business profitable. He relied on the word from others that it 
was a profitable business venture. The fact that he had to return the truck within two 
months shows he did not carefully evaluate the business prospects. He entered the 
business without a solid business plan. He did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances.   
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by 
payment of debt only under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant 
made one payment to the creditor in September 2009 after the hearing. He does not 
have a verifiable plan to pay his delinquent debt. One payment after the hearing is not 
evidence of a good-faith effort to resolve the debt. Applicant has not mitigated security 
concerns based on his finances. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information. The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. 
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government. Appellant’s incorrect answers to 
questions on his security clearance application concerning finances and truck 
repossession raise a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition 
(PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) (the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
and material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification. While there is a security concern for an 
omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral 
statement to the government when applying for a security clearance, every omission, 
concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification must be 
deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to 
deceive. Appellant did not believe that when he voluntarily returned the truck to the 
dealer/creditor that it was considered repossession. At the time that he completed the 
security clearance application, he did not know that the truck had not sold for enough to 
cover the remainder on the loan. At best, he thought he may owe a few thousand 
dollars. The creditor may have noted for the credit reporting agencies that a debt was 
owed as early as May 2008, but they did not notify Applicant until December 2008. He 
did not receive information from the creditor of the amount owed until after he 
completed the security clearance applicant. Appellant honestly and reasonably believed 
the truck was not repossessed, and he did not have other debts more than 180 days or 
90 days past due. His answers to the questions were not deliberately false because of 
his honest and reasonable belief and his lack of information on the debt. Accordingly, 
his wrong answers were not a deliberate intent to deceive. 
 
 Applicant's conviction in 1989 for Obtaining Property by False Pretense raises 
PC DC AG 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue area that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as  a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information). 
 
 Appellant has raised by his testimony Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC 
MC) AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment). The offense happened in 1989, over 20 years ago. Applicant completed the 
 
8 
 
 
sentence of a suspended jail term and paid a fine. He has not been involved in any 
other criminal or adverse conduct since that time. The passage of time and lack of other 
adverse conduct shows that the actions are not likely to recur. These factors also show 
that his conduct in 1989 does not now impact on his reliability, trustworthiness or good 
judgment. Applicant has mitigated security concerns for personal conduct. 
 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant's willingness 
to serve the country in Iraq, and the fact he was injured while working there.  
 
Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. He is not required, as a 
matter of law, to establish that he paid the debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is 
that he has a plan to resolve his financial problems and takes significant action to 
implement that plan. The entirety of his financial situation and his actions can 
reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which his plan to reduce his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. Available, reliable information about 
the person's behavior, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.   
 
Applicant has not established a meaningful track record of debt payment. 
Applicant knew of the debt in January 2009 when he was in Iraq making a good salary. 
He left Iraq in March 2009 after being injured. He suffered a loss of pay for a short time 
until he started receiving workman's compensation. He contacted the creditor in May 
2009, but he made only one payments of $100 after the hearing in September 2009. His 
lack of action on the debt until recently is not a good-faith effort to resolve the debt. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has not demonstrated a credible and realistic plan to manage his debt under 
the circumstances. The inability or unwillingness to establish a concrete plan to resolve 
his financial issues indicates he will not be concerned, responsible, and careful in 
regard to classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not 
established he is suitable for a security clearance. I conclude Appellant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation. He has mitigated 
security concerns for personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusions 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
