                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-07293
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire
May 1, 2008
______________
Remand Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP), on March 10, 2006.  On April 12, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 22, 2007, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on June 29, 2007.  A motion to join both the Applicant’s hearing and his
wife’s hearing was considered and granted, based upon a showing of good cause.
(See, ISCR 06-07292, November 27, 2007).  Accordingly, a notice of hearing was
issued on July 10, 2007, scheduling the hearing for August 23, 2007.  At the hearing the
Government presented three exhibits.  The Applicant presented nine exhibits and called
one witness, his wife.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The Applicant submitted one
Post-Hearing Exhibit consisting of two pages.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on September 6, 2007.
2
The initial decision in this matter was issued by the undersigned Administrative
Judge on November 27, 2007, denying the Applicant’s security clearance.  Applicant
appealed the decision to the Appeal Board, and both Applicant and Department
Counsel filed appeal briefs.  On April 16, 2008, the Appeal Board remanded this case to
the Administrative Judge for a new decision under Guideline B stating, “the Board
concluded that Guideline C had been resolved in favor of the Applicant.  Therefore that
Guideline is no longer at issue.”  (See ISCR case No. 06-07293 at 3, fn 7 (App. Bd. April
16, 2008).)  Accordingly, only Guideline B will discussed in this Remand Decision.  The
Appeal Board further noted that:
In her new decision, the Judge’s analysis should address all relevant
circumstances relating to the Guideline B allegations, including the current
significance of the Applicant’s foreign family ties, Applicant’s ties to the
U.S., the circumstances under which the Applicant has previously held a
security clearance, the evidence at to Applicant’s character, and the
identity of the country in accordance with Directive.  (Id. at 3 (footnote
omitted).)
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 60 years of age and has a Ph.D in
Engineering.  He is President and Security Officer of a defense contracting company.
As an officer of the corporation it is required for him to have a security clearance for the
corporation to have a Facility Security Clearance.  He seeks a security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born and raised in Israel.  He moved to the United States in
1973, for graduate school, and obtained his doctorate degree in Engineering in 1978.
Since then, he has worked in the defense industry and has held a security clearance
much of that time.  From 1978 to 1987, even before becoming a United States citizen,
he held a DoD security clearance.  (Tr. p. 123).  In 1987, he became a United States
citizen.  Sometime later, the Applicant formed his own company, where he has used his
scientific, engineering and management experience, and has for the past sixteen years
worked as a defense contractor.  His company employees 16 people and runs several
millions of dollars of research and development in support of DoD, with a significant
portion in classified fields.  (See Applicant’s Exhibits C, D and E).
The Applicant’s elderly mother is 85 years old and in poor health, and his sister,
who is his mother’s caretaker, is 51 years old.  Both are citizens of and reside in Israel.
His mother has always been a housewife, and his sister works part time selling
tupperware and dietary supplements.  She lives with the Applicant’s mother is an
apartment that they own, worth approximately $90,000.  Neither of them have any
3
technical education or are affiliated with the Israeli government in any way.  The
Applicant contacts his mother or sister at least once a month or so.  When Applicant has
an occasion to speak to his mother or sister, they discuss his mother’s health.  (Tr.
p.71).  Since coming to the United States, he has traveled to Israel every two to three
years to visit his mother.  The Applicant provides no financial support to his mother or
sister of any kind.  His mother is a Holocaust Survivor who is supported by the lifetime
compensation she receives from Germany and social security from her deceased
husband. 
The Applicant’s wife and four children were born and reside in the United States.
He has many extended family members from his wife’s side that reside in the United
States.  His net worth in the United States in approximately $5,000,000.  He has no
assets of any kind in Israel.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit B).  
Numerous character references that include his past supervisor, professional
colleagues in the defense industry, and his rabbi, all attest to the Applicant’s reliability,
trustworthiness and good judgment.  They highly recommend the Applicant for a
security clearance.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit  G).
The Applicant has made many significant technical contributions to the United
States security and defense industry over the past 30 years.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit E,
tabs 1 through 10).   He has also received many awards, commendations and special
recognition for his major contributions to the defense industry.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit
G).
I have considered the relationship that does exist between the United States and
Israel.  The fact that Israeli tourists may enter the United States without a visa, the large
financial assistance the United States provides to Israel, and the treaties between the
United States and Israel, specifically bi-lateral agreements involving defense,
commerce, atomic energy, aviation, energy, mutual security, and terrorism.  (See
Applicant’s Exhibit H).
  
 I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Israel.
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government and
exercises executive power.  According to the Department of State Report on Human
Rights, the Israeli government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but
there are some issues with respect to treatment of Palestinian detainees, conditions in
some detention and interrogation facilities, and discrimination against Israel’s Arab
citizens.  Terrorist suicide bombings are a continued threat in Israel and the U. S.
Government has received information indicating that American interests could be the
focus of terrorist attacks.  American citizens have been urged to exercise a high degree
of caution and common sense when visiting restaurants, businesses, and other places
associated with U.S. interests and/or located near U.S. official buildings.  The theft of
sensitive and proprietary information threatens the national security in both military and
economic terms, and it reveals the intelligence-gathering capabilities of foreign
governments and foreign companies.  The National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000
Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists
Israel as one of the active collectors of proprietary information.  Furthermore, Israeli
4
military Officers have been implicated in this type of technology collection in  the United
States.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign person, the country in which
these person are located, or the positions or activities of those person in that country
are such that it is unlikely  the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (b) There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
5
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
6
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign preference and has foreign
connections may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to
the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises
legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the
interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government
must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to
abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
The Applicant by reason of birth, was at one time, an Israeli citizen.  However, he
has lived in the United States since 1973, obtained an advanced education, became a
respected United States citizen, and made the United States his permanent home.  He
has a wife and four children who were all born in the United States and reside here.  He
has a net worth of approximately $5,000,000 in the United States and no assets in
Israel.  He has worked in the defense industry for over 30 years, held a security
clearance for many of those years, and has incurred no security violations.  He is highly
respected in his field and has made major contributions to the United States security
and defense program.  The Applicant has so much invested in the United States that
the possibility that he could succumb to foreign influence of any type is extremely
minimal.  
The Applicant has only two family members in Israel that include his elderly
mother and caretaker sister.  He has limited conversation with them that revolve around
his mother’s health.  Neither his mother or sister have any association with the Israeli
government.  Although they know that the Applicant owns a company that is somehow
affiliated with defense, they are not capable of understanding what the Applicant does
for the Defense Department, nor do they know that the Applicant has applied for a
security clearance.  The Applicant has no assets in Israel and does not stand to inherit
any.  Furthermore, Israel is a close ally of the United States.  
  The Applicant’s counsel submitted “Applicant’s Brief to the Administrative Judge on Remand” on April 30, 2008. 1
This document has not been considered in making this decision.  
7
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Condition 8(c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence
or exploitation also applies.
In addition to the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in this case, I have also
considered the “whole person” concept.  The Appellant is 60 years of age and is the
President and Security Officer of a defense contracting company.  He has worked in the
defense industry and held a DoD security clearance for a considerable period of time.
He has an impeccable record demonstrating the utmost respect, responsibility, honesty
and trustworthiness toward the United States government.  Under the particular facts of
this case, I find that he has mitigated the concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence
and Guideline C, Foreign Preference.
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guidelines B and C of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the
Directive.  Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guidelines
B and C.      1
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
1.b.: For the Applicant
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 2.a.: For the Applicant
2.b.: For the Applicant
2.c.: For the Applicant
2.d.: For the Applicant
2.e.: For the Applicant
2.f.: For the Applicant
2.g.: For the Applicant
8
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
