                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-07292
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire
May 1, 2008
______________
Remand Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on April 30,
2004. On April 12, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the
Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and recommended
referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on April 25, 2007, and she requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on June 29, 2007.  A motion to join both the Applicant’s hearing and her
husband’s hearing was considered and granted, based upon a showing of good cause.
(See, ISCR 06-07293, November 27, 2007).  A notice of hearing was issued on July 10,
2007, scheduling the hearing for August 23, 2007.  At the hearing the Government
presented one exhibit.  The Applicant presented four exhibits and called one witness,
her husband.  She also testified on her own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was
received on September 6, 2007.
2
The initial decision in this matter was issued by the undersigned Administrative
Judge on November 27, 2008, granting the Applicant’s security clearance.  Department
Counsel appealed the decision to the Appeal Board, and both Applicant and
Department Counsel filed appeal briefs.  On April 16, 2008, the Appeal Board remanded
this case to the Administrative Judge for a new decision under Guideline B.  The Appeal
Board stated in a footnote that “The Judge’s favorable finding under Guideline E is not
challenged on appeal”.  (See ISCR Case No. 06-07192, at 2 (App. Bd. April 16, 2008).)
Therefore, only Guideline B will be addressed in this remand decision.  The Appeal
Board noted that:
“The Judge should issue a new decision which discusses the
application of  DC7(d) in light of the Judge’s ultimate findings and
conclusions with regard to Applicant’s husband.”  (See Id. at 3).
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 57 years of age and has a Master of
Business Administration degree.  She is Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of a
defense contracting company.   As an officer of the corporation it is required that she
have a clearance for the corporation to have a Facility Security Clearance.  She seeks a
security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant is a native born American citizen.  Her husband was a dual citizen
of the United States and Israel.  He has now surrendered his Israeli passport and
renounced his Israeli citizenship.  (See Tr. 97).  The Applicant’s husband has worked in
the defense industry for over thirty years, and has held a security clearance for many of
those years.  He is highly respected in the defense industry and has demonstrated
loyalty and responsibility toward the United States.  He is President and Security Officer
of the company for which the Applicant is employed.  There is no evidence in the record
that the relationship between the Applicant and her husband creates a heightened risk
of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.  (See Remand Decision 06-
07293 (May 1, 2008).)   
The Applicant’s mother-in-law and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of
Israel.  The Applicant’s mother-in-law and the Applicant do not communicate well
together.  Her mother-in-law does not speak English and the Applicant’s Hebrew is very
limited so their communication is very difficult.  Her sister-in-law speaks English, but
very little.  Although the Applicant’s husband speaks to his mother and sister in Israel on
a monthly basis, the Applicant, for the most part, is unable to communicate with them.    
   
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Israel.
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government and
3
exercises executive power.  According to the Department of State Report on Human
Rights, the Israeli government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but
there are some issues with respect to treatment of Palestinian detainees, conditions in
some detention and interrogation facilities, and discrimination against Israel’s Arab
citizens.  Terrorist suicide bombings are a continued threat in Israel and the U. S.
Government has received information indicating that American interests could be the
focus of terrorist attacks.  American citizens have been urged to exercise a high degree
of caution and common sense when visiting restaurants, businesses, and other places
associated with U.S. interests and/or located near U.S. official buildings.  The theft of
sensitive and proprietary information threatens the national security in both military and
economic terms, and it reveals the intelligence-gathering capabilities of foreign
governments and foreign companies.  The National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000
Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists
Israel as one of the active collectors of proprietary information.  Furthermore, Israeli
military Officers have been implicated in this type of technology collection in  the United
States.
 
A letter of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant by the Senior
Rabbi at their synagogue indicates that he considers her to be a honest, trustworthy,
upstanding and respectable member of society.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit D).
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
7(a)  contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion; 
7(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign person, the country in which
these person are located, or the positions or activities of those person in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
5
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in Foreign Influence that indicates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has foreign contacts in Israel (Guideline B).  This evidence can indicate poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and 7(d) sharing
living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with
foreign person, the country in which these person are located, or the positions or
  The Applicant’s counsel submitted “Applicant’s Brief to the Administrative Judge on Remand” on April 30, 2008. 1
This document has not been considered in making this decision.
6
activities of those person in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S., and 8(c) Contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation also apply.
The Applicant’s husband is a United States citizen who has held a security
clearance for many years, and who has an impeccable record demonstrating
responsibility, honesty and trustworthiness, toward the United States government and
the defense industry.  There is no evidence in the record indicating that the Applicant’s
relationship with her husband would create a heightened risk of foreign inducement of
any kind.        
The Applicant has little or no contact with her mother and sister-in-law in Israel.
In fact they don’t even speak the same language.  Furthermore, her relatives in Israel
are not affiliated in any way with the Israeli government, nor do they know or understand
what the Applicant does for a living.  Sufficient mitigation has been shown.  Accordingly,
I find for the Applicant under this guideline.  
In addition to the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in this case, I have also
considered the “whole person” concept.  The Applicant is 57 years of age and is the
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer for a defense contracting company.  She has
enormous responsibilities within her company and on behalf of the United States.  She
is a native born United States citizen who has four children all born in the United States
who reside here.  Her husband was, at one time, a dual citizen of Israel.  He has
formally and forever renounced his dual citizenship with Israel and surrendered his
Israeli passport.  There is nothing in the record to question her loyalty or show that she
will not uphold and protect the national interests of the United States above all.
Furthermore, there is no evidence in the record to conclude that the Applicant would
succumb to any inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion by the government of
Israel or through her husband.  Considering all of the facts and circumstances, I find
that she has mitigated the concerns arising from her foreign influence.
 
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline B Foreign Influence and Guideline E Personal
Conduct of the SOR. Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guidelines B and E.1
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing her request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence
supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
    
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
