 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-24129 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on April 11, 2006. On October 22, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 18, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to be proceed on 
January 25, 2008. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on January 
28, 2008. The case was transferred to me on February 26, 2008. On March 13, 2008, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 14, 2008. The hearing 
was held, as scheduled. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1-5 without objection. The Applicant offered five exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - E without objection. Applicant 
testified. The record was held open until April 28, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted a nine-page document that was 
admitted as AE F without objection. The transcript was received on April 22, 2008. The 
record closed on April 28, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for his current employer for the past six 
years. From 1970 to 1990, he served on active duty in the United States Air Force. He 
retired at the rank of Staff Sergeant (E-5). He held a security clearance for 19 years 
while on active duty in the Air Force.  He has a high school education. He is married 
and has two adult sons. (Tr at 6-8, 32-34, 55-56; Gov 1; AE F at 2, 8.)   
 
On April 11, 2006, Applicant filed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He answered, “No” in response to questions 28(a) “In the last 7 
years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 28(b) “Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:  a $9,891 debt resulting from an automobile repossession (SOR ¶ 
1.a; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 5 at 5; Gov 6 at 2); a $1,837 charged off credit card 
account (SOR ¶ 1.b; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 4; Gov 5 at 4); a $1,392 delinquent credit card 
account (SOR ¶ 1.c; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 4); a $648 charged off credit card account  
(SOR ¶ 1.d; Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 4; Gov 5 at 4); and a $6,047 charged off military 
exchange credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.e; Gov 2 at 2-3; Gov 4 at 8; Gov 5 at 6). 
 
Applicant states that he did not intend to falsify his e-QIP application. He did not 
realize that he had debts that were that old. He did not obtain a credit report before he 
completed his e-QIP application. He is an honest man and would never betray his 
country. (Tr at 53-54.) 
 
Applicant claims most of the delinquent accounts were the result of bad financial 
management. He and his wife do not follow a budget very well. They attended financial 
counseling a few years after he retired from the military. (Tr at 36, 58-59.) He describes 
his current financial situation as “It’s not great, ma’am. It could be better, but we’re 
working hard on it. We’re trying to catch up on stuff.” He has not opened any new 
accounts and occasionally gets behind a payment or two. (Tr at 51; 60.)  
 
At hearing, Applicant pointed out that he had a state tax lien which he paid off in 
October 2007. (Tr at 56-67.) A recent credit report, dated April 8, 2008, listed a state tax 
 
3 
 
 
lien for $2,041. (Gov 6.) After the hearing, Applicant provided documentation verifying 
the debt was paid off. (AE F at 3.) 
 
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $9,891 balance owed after automobile repossession in December 
2005. Applicant admits he never made payments towards this debt. He was four 
payments late when the truck was repossessed. After the automobile was resold, the 
creditor sent him a letter indicating that he still owed the creditor $9,000 on the loan. 
Applicant recently contacted the creditor and the creditor said that he does not owe 
anything. (Tr at 35-38.) He provided a letter from the creditor, dated March 10, 2008, 
that states Applicant was a member in good standing during the time he had an account 
with the creditor from July 27, 2004, to April 19, 2007. (AE D.) The debt is still listed on 
his most recent credit report, dated April 8, 2008. (Gov 6 at 3.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $1,837 charged off credit card account. Applicant recently entered 
into a repayment plan with the creditor. He agreed to pay $200 a month to resolve this 
debt. He made his first payment on April 8, 2008. (Tr at 27, 40; AE B; AE F at 4.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $1,392 charged off credit card account. Applicant testified that he 
settled this account. A credit report, dated April 8, 2008, indicated that a credit card 
account was settled. Upon further review, it appears the account that was settled is the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d based on the account numbers provided in the credit report. 
Applicant has three different credit card accounts with the same company. (Tr at 41-42; 
Gov 6 at 2.) He testified that the credit card company said one of the accounts is closed. 
He is willing to pay it if he owes it. (Tr at 43.)  This account is not listed on his most 
recent credit report, dated April 8, 2008. (Gov 6.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d:  $648 charged off credit card account.  Applicant settled this account 
and it is paid in full.  There was some confusion over the account number and he 
thought he settled the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The account number indicates that 
this is the credit card account that was settled. (Tr at 42-43; AE C; Gov 6 at 2.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $6,047 charged off military exchange credit card account. Applicant 
thought payments were being taken out of his military retirement account towards this 
debt. They were not. An allotment of $210 per month is currently taken out of his military 
retirement check towards this debt. The allotment started on November 1, 2007. (Tr at 
44-47; AE E; Answer to SOR.)   
 
Applicant’s take home pay is approximately $2,800 per month after taxes. His 
wife’s take home pay is approximately $2,800 per month.  Their mortgage is $1,300 per 
month. They have a $230 car payment. Groceries and expenses are approximately 
$500 to $600 per month. (Tr at 48.) Based on the information Applicant provided at the 
hearing, their total monthly expenses would be $2,030.  After expenses, approximately 
$3,570 in discretionary income is left over. Applicant is current on all federal and state 
income taxes. (Tr at 56.)  
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant’s project manager states that he is a steady and reliable employee. He 
performs his daily tasks efficiently and effectively and handles his collateral duties in a 
professional manner. (AE A.) His assistant project manager has worked with Applicant 
for the past seven years and says that he is an asset to the organization. He states that 
Applicant conducts himself in a professional, highly organized manner. He is relied upon 
to train and coordinate other duties within the organization. (AE F at 7.) A personal 
friend of Applicant states that he treats everyone with respect. He does not gossip or 
cheat. He is the first one to offer a helping hand. She describes Applicant as a “hard 
worker, good husband, an exceptional parent and very good friend.” Her grandchildren 
look up to him and refer to him as “Uncle.” (AE F at 9.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting 
financial obligations. He incurred five unresolved delinquent accounts with a total 
approximate balance of $19,815.   
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Although Applicant is taking steps to resolve his accounts, only one account was 
resolved at the close of the record. He entered into payment plans for two of the 
accounts. He recently entered into a payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.b. It is 
too soon to apply FC MC ¶ 20(a) based on Applicant’s past history of financial 
irresponsibility as well as his admission that he and his wife still occasionally get a 
payment or two behind on some of their bills.    
 
 
6 
 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant states most of his 
financial problems were the result of financial irresponsibility as opposed to conditions 
that were beyond his control.  
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Shortly after he retired in 1990, Applicant and his wife attended 
financial counseling. They continued to have financial problems. Applicant is making 
progress toward resolving his financial delinquencies but it is too soon to conclude that 
his financial problems are under control. Financial counseling would be helpful for 
Applicant to establish a budget and learn strategies to avoid financial problems in the 
future.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant has contacted each of the 
creditors alleged in the SOR.  He paid off the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He is making 
payments towards the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e.  He provided a letter from 
the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a which states that his account is in good standing. (He 
admits that he never made a payment towards the balance of the automobile loan after 
his truck was repossessed and the debt remains listed on his most recent credit report, 
dated April 8, 2008.) The credit card company claims that he no longer owes the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt no longer appears on his credit report. (Gov 6.) 
Applicant has made progress towards resolving his accounts. If it is later determined 
that he owes the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, he is willing to resolve the 
accounts. He submitted documentation indicating he does not owe these accounts at 
this time.          
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent accounts in response to section 28(a) and 28(b) on his e-QIP application. 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 17(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
 
7 
 
 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) potentially applies to this allegation. 
Applicant claims that he did not realize that he had older delinquent debts. He did not 
have a copy of a recent credit report and was not aware of the delinquent accounts.  He 
did not intend to falsify his e-QIP application. I find Applicant’s explanation credible. 
Some individuals have financial problems because they do not keep track of their 
accounts. I find for Applicant with respect to the personal conduct concern.   
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
career and his favorable references from co-workers and friends. Although Applicant did 
not resolve all of his delinquent accounts, he provided proof that he took steps to 
resolve each one of his delinquent accounts. He paid one account and is making 
payments towards two other accounts. Applicant made no payments on two accounts, 
however, both creditors informed Applicant that the accounts are closed. I give credit to 
Applicant for contacting these creditors in an attempt to resolve these accounts. It 
appears Applicant is capable of resolving his debts based on his current financial 
situation and his most recent credit report. Applicant is warned that future financial 
problems will raise future security concerns. He should take preventive steps to avoid 
future financial problems. Considering his favorable work performance and 20 years of 
honorable military service, Applicant’s current financial situation does not raise a 
security concern. Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations, and personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
     
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
