  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- ) ISCR Case No. 06-25655
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on November 3, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline J for criminal conduct and Guideline F for financial
considerations. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided against
Applicant.
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received on December 26, 2007, and he
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on April 17, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 23,
2008.
The record was kept open until April 25, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity
to submit a copy of his military discharge paperwork (DD Form 214). It was timely
submitted and forwarded by department counsel without objections. The DD Form 214
is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit F. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the SOR alleges that in December 2005 Applicant pleaded
guilty to the federal offense of conspiracy to commit fraud relating to the Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371, and he was
sentenced to two years of probation and ordered to serve 100 hours of community
service. Applicant admits this allegation. Under Guideline F, the SOR refers to the
conspiracy offense alleged under Guideline J and alleges that in 2005 Applicant filed a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, which was discharged in 2006. Applicant admits these
allegations. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He works as a field
engineer and is responsible for maintenance and repair of equipment in the field. He
has worked for his current employer since 2004. He worked for another federal
contractor from 1997 to 2004. In addition, his employment history includes more than
two decades of military service in the U.S. Army (Tr. 51–54; Exhibit F). He retired as a
senior noncommissioned officer (NCO) at the pay grade of E7. His discharge paperwork
reflects a solid and successful career as an Army NCO who specialized in the repair of
air defense artillery equipment (Exhibit F). 
Applicant’s wife is 59 years old, and they have been married since 1972. They
have no children. She is now a partner in a used-car business.
3
Applicant’s federal conviction stems from a HUD housing fraud scheme.
According to Applicant, in 2002 he and his wife entered into a business agreement with
a trusted friend, and they formed a corporation to buy foreclosed properties (Exhibit E).
The general idea was to buy houses from banks, finance companies, and the HUD, and
then sell the houses after making any necessary repairs. Applicant maintains that the
business partner was buying HUD homes via straw purchasers without  his knowledge. 
In May 2005, Applicant, his wife, and three others were indicted by a federal
grand jury (Exhibit 5). Applicant was charged in Counts 1 and 3 of the indictment. In
Count 1, he was charged with the conspiracy offense as well as engaging in fraud or
making a false statement for a HUD transaction in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1010. In
Count 3, he was charged with a making a false statement to a federal agency in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001.   
On December 1, 2005, Applicant pleaded guilty to Count 1 for conspiracy to
commit fraud relating to the HUD in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371 (Exhibit 4). The court
dismissed Count 3 based on the prosecution’s motion. The court sentenced Applicant to
serve probation for 24 months. Also, he was required to serve 100 hours of community
service as a condition of probation. He served the probation without incident or violation.
In December 2007, he was released from court-ordered supervision and all supervision
requirements (Exhibit A). Applicant has no other history of criminal conduct.  
Applicant’s wife pleaded guilty on the same day. She was sentenced to serve
probation for 4 years or 48 months. She is currently serving probation and is scheduled
to remain on probation until about December 1, 2009. 
Recently, Applicant and his wife received notice from the HUD that they owed a
debt related to the sale of houses (Tr. 63–65). They paid $11,000 to settle the matter,
and it is pending final resolution. Besides the HUD debt, Applicant is aware of no
current collection activity against him (Tr. 63). 
Before pleading guilty, Applicant and his wife spent a large sum of money on
legal fees. Each had a defense attorney, and Applicant puts the figure at about $55,000
for legal fees (Tr. 38). This expense, along with his wife’s job loss, resulted in Applicant
and his wife seeking protection by pursuing the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case in which
they listed total assets of about $261,010 and total liabilities of about $316,792. The
bankruptcy court granted a discharge in January 2006. 
In addition to Applicant’s income as a field engineer, he receives about $1,575
per month for his military retirement pay. He has about $2,200 in a checking account
and about $30,000 in a 401(k) account (Tr. 57). Applicant is meeting his financial
obligations and able to save money (Tr. 57). Three credit reports were admitted into
evidence and none reflect a past-due, collection, or charged-off account (Exhibits 2, 3,
and D). The most recent credit report from April 2008 reports a credit score of 646,
which is considered “fair” (Exhibit D). He has two sizeable car loans and a mortgage
payment, which are current and in good standing.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes5
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 15
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”16
 DC 3 is the “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally17
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
 18 U.S.C. § 371 (“If two or more persons conspire either to commit any offense against the United States,18
or to defraud the United States, or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose, and one or more of
such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be fined under this title or imprisoned
not more than five years, or both.”).
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity14
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.”  15
In general, a security concern is raised by Applicant’s 2005 federal conviction. In
particular, DC 1  and DC 3  apply against Applicant based on the grand jury indictment16 17
for multiple offenses and his subsequent guilty plea to the conspiracy offense. Although
the sentence was limited to probation and community service, the conspiracy offense
was a felony with a maximum punishment of imprisonment for five years.  He18
completed probation a few months ago in December 2007. To sum up, the criminal
conduct calls into question Applicant’s judgment and his ability or willingness to comply
with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22. 19
 See ISCR Case No. 04-05712 (App. Bd. Oct. 31, 2006) (addressing the collateral-estoppel doctrine).20
6
The guideline provides that certain conditions  may mitigate security concerns.19
The four potentially applicable MCs are as follows:
MC 1–so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
MC 2–the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
MC 3–evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
MC 4–there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
He was indicted in 2005 for criminal conduct in about 2002, he pleaded guilty in
2005, and he completed his sentence to probation a few months ago. Given these
circumstances, the criminal behavior is relatively recent. In addition, although the
circumstances were unusual, it continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment in light of the nature of the offense (conspiracy to commit fraud).
Accordingly, MC 1 does not apply in Applicant’s favor. 
There is no evidence suggesting Applicant was pressured or coerced.
Accordingly, MC 2 does not apply in Applicant’s favor. 
Applicant seems to suggest that he and his wife were duped by a trusted friend
(Exhibit E). Nevertheless, Applicant, who was represented by an attorney, elected not to
contest the case against him when he pleaded guilty. Applicant’s federal felony
conviction precludes consideration of evidence that he did not commit the offense to
which he pleaded guilty.  Accordingly, MC 3 does not apply in Applicant’s favor.  20
MC 4 applies in Applicant’s favor because there is some evidence of reform and
rehabilitation. He served probation without incident or violation and was released from
court-ordered supervision on about December 1, 2007 (Exhibit A). He remained
employed during the entire period, and he appears to have a good employment record
(Exhibits B and C). He is working to recover from the financial problems resulting from
his criminal case and his credit history is improving (Exhibit D). Before the federal
indictment in 2005, he had no history of criminal conduct, and he had enjoyed a
successful career in the Army (Exhibit F). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating21
conditions under Guideline F). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 22
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 23
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 24
 DC 4 is “deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income25
tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional breaches of
financial trust.”
 Revised Guidelines at 14. 26
7
The SOR also alleges security concerns under Guideline F for financial
considerations,  where a security concern typically exists due to significant unpaid21
debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”  Similarly, an individual22
who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or
careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified information.   
Although not a typical Guideline F case, the record evidence supports a
conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial problems. First, Applicant’s Chapter
7 bankruptcy case is substantial evidence of inability to satisfy debts  and a history of23
not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of the guideline. Second,24
Applicant’s federal conviction is substantial evidence of a deceptive or illegal financial
practice within the meaning of the guideline.  Taken together, these circumstances call25
into question Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
The guideline provides that certain conditions  may mitigate security concerns,26
and those conditions are as follows:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
8
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Based on the record evidence as a whole, MC 3 is most pertinent; the others do not
apply in Applicant’s favor. 
The federal conviction, as discussed above, is  relatively recent. Likewise, the
Chapter 7 bankruptcy case is relatively recent because it was discharged about two
years ago in January 2006. In addition, although the circumstances were unusual, it
continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment in light of the
nature of the offense (conspiracy to commit fraud). Accordingly, MC 1 does not apply in
Applicant’s favor. 
There is insufficient evidence to show that the conditions that resulted in the
financial problems were beyond Applicant’s control. Accordingly, MC 2 does not apply in
Applicant’s favor. 
There are indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or
are under control. His financial condition has improved since the bankruptcy. He has no
current past-due, collection, or charged-off accounts, and he is current with his bills. He
has money in the bank and in a retirement account. And he appears to be living within
his means. Accordingly, Applicant receives some credit under MC 3. 
Finally, MC 4, MC 5, and MC 6 are inapplicable based on the facts of this case. 
To sum up under the whole-person concept, this case presents both disqualifying
and mitigating circumstances, which requires thoughtful balancing. First, Applicant is 60
years old and sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions. In other words, he had
sufficient experience in the ways of the world to know what he was doing when he
engaged in the activity that led to his federal conviction. Second, viewed individually, his
federal conviction and his Chapter 7 bankruptcy case each raise doubts about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. And viewed collectively, these circumstances
raise serious doubts about his suitability for access to classified information. Third,
Applicant receives credit for his lengthy record of honorable military service, the
absence of workplace misconduct, his good employment record, and his otherwise
9
good record as a law-abiding citizen. But those matters are not enough to overcome or
outweigh the security concerns raised by his federal conviction and the Chapter 7
bankruptcy case. The nature of the criminal offense is of special concern because it
involved a conspiracy to commit fraud related to a department of the federal
government. Although an unfavorable clearance decision may have an adverse effect
on Applicant, his family, or his employer, it should come as no surprise to Applicant that
the same federal government that prosecuted him for conspiracy to commit fraud now
has serious doubts about his fitness for a security clearance. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, a commonsense decision militates against Applicant and in favor
of protecting national security.   
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2b:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
