 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-25219 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his criminal conduct. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On April 2, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 19, 2007, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on March 7, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on March 11, 2008, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 15, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 29, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called eight 
 
2 
 
witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 23, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel submitted a notice on March 4, 2008, that SOR ¶ 1.oo was 
withdrawn. Applicant did not object to the notice and SOR ¶ 1.oo was withdrawn. The 
notice is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant’s attorney submitted a summary of 
specifications in the SOR. Department Counsel did not object and the summary was 
accepted as HE II.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR with the exception of ¶¶ 1.m, 1.r, 1.x, 1.gg, and 1.jj, which he denied.   
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never been 
married and has no children. Applicant is a recovering heroin addict. His father is a 
retired military officer and Applicant moved a number of times as a child. He was an 
honor student in high school, was involved in sports and extracurricular activities, and 
was a Boy Scout. He first started smoking marijuana in about the tenth grade. He was 
curious and his friends were using drugs. He experimented with other drugs including 
pills and hallucinogens. He worked several jobs while he was in high school and was 
able to pay for his marijuana. He started selling marijuana in his senior year in high 
school. The person that he bought his marijuana from told Applicant that if he sold 
marijuana that he could get his marijuana for free. His marijuana supplier later gave him 
heroin to sell, which he did. Applicant first used heroin around the end of his senior year 
or shortly thereafter. He decided to try the heroin that he was selling. He stated that the 
first time he used heroin, it made him sick, but he liked it. He stated “it just made me feel 
real good. The weight of the world was gone.”1 
 
 Applicant lived at home and attended college after he graduated from high 
school. He continued to sell marijuana and heroin and his heroin use progressed to 
where he was addicted and using daily. He was snorting the heroin because he had an 
abundant supply of heroin from what he was selling. Applicant’s college grades were 
affected by his drug use and he left college before he graduated. He moved out of his 
parents’ home shortly thereafter. Eventually his supplier no longer trusted Applicant, 
and he was forced to buy his heroin. Because the purity of the heroin he purchased was 
not as good as what he was used to, he started injecting the heroin to maximize the 
effect.2 
 
 After Applicant was no longer selling heroin, he started committing burglaries to 
support his habit. He was arrested for burglary the first time in 1980, when he was 25 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 146-156, 194; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 155-157. 
 
 
3 
 
years old. In addition to his numerous burglaries, he regularly shoplifted and committed 
other crimes to support his addiction. He was arrested on more than 35 occasions 
between 1980 and 1994, for offenses including burglary, breaking and entering, grand 
larceny, probation violation, receiving stolen property, assault, shoplifting, theft, armed 
robbery, and numerous drug-related charges. He was convicted on 19 occasions for the 
various charges.3 He was not convicted of armed robbery. He served about 35 months 
in the state penitentiary for his various felony convictions and additional time in the 
county jail, work camps, and work release. Applicant estimates that when he was not 
incarcerated, from the time he was 26 until he was 42, he was clean and off heroin a 
total of about two years.4  
 
 Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.gg, which alleges he was arrested 
and charged with Fugitive From Justice in 1991. Applicant credibly testified that was a 
mistake. His attorney told him he did not need to be present at a hearing. The charge 
was dismissed. He was arrested and charged with Fugitive From Justice again in 1992, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.jj. Applicant was incarcerated in another jurisdiction and was 
unable to attend a court date, resulting in a warrant for his arrest. The charge was 
dismissed.5   
 
 Applicant was released from prison to work release in January 1995. He went to 
work in the construction industry for one of the witnesses who testified on his behalf. He 
was discharged from work release to probation in April 1995. He was drug free from 
January 1995 through September 1996. In September 1996, a female friend called him 
and asked him if he wanted to “go get high.” He used heroin with her. He did not use it 
again for another month. He used it again two weeks later and then he started using 
regularly until July 1997. Applicant had a warrant for his arrest for a probation violation 
for failing the probation office drug test. He knew he was going to be arrested and his 
life was in shambles. He called his mother and his probation officer and turned himself 
in on a significant date in his life in July 1997. He has not used illegal drugs or been 
involved in illegal activities since he turned himself in. He went back to jail for several 
months and then was released to work release, where he worked again for the same 
construction company.6 
 
 Applicant had attempted to quit heroin on numerous occasions prior to July 1997, 
and he was in various treatment programs. He still thought that he could do it on his 
own terms. In July 1997, he realized he could not and he accepted the principles of 
Narcotics Anonymous.7 
                                                          
3 HE II submitted by Applicant’s counsel lists 18 convictions. Applicant was also convicted of Petit 
Larceny as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ee. 
 
4 Tr. at 158-165; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1-29. 
 
5 Tr. at 186-188. 
 
6 Tr. at 165-168. 
 
7 Tr. at 167-170. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant returned to school. He graduated Cum Laude with an Associate’s 
degree from a community college in 1998. He graduated on the Dean’s List in January 
2002, with a Bachelor of Science degree from the same university he attended in the 
1970s. He was awarded a Master of Business Administration degree from another 
respected university in 2003, and a Master of Science degree from the same university 
in 2005. He has continued to pursue education and training and he has received 
certifications in the information technology (IT) field.8  
 
 Applicant continued to work for the construction company until 1999. He was 
very highly regarded and trusted by his employer, but it was time to move on. He 
obtained a job in the IT field in 1999. He worked for this company until December 2003. 
The former Chief Executive Officer of the company wrote a glowing letter of 
recommendation for him. Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor since 
January 2004.9  
 
 Applicant returned home to live with his parents after he was released from 
prison and he still lives there. His father essentially disowned his son while he was 
using drugs and living the criminal life. He testified about the positive changes in 
Applicant’s life since he stopped using drugs and he is proud of what his son has 
accomplished. Applicant loves his job, where he is very well regarded and earns a high 
salary. He works 50 to 60 hours per week and has not missed a day of work in many 
years. He is also co-owner of an IT company, with the knowledge of his employer. His 
partner in the IT company also works at the same defense contractor where Applicant is 
employed. He testified that Applicant is trustworthy and completely honest. Applicant 
has developed a close personal relationship with one of his professional colleagues. 
She is a recovering alcoholic who has been sober for 20 years. She testified about his 
honesty, integrity, and commitment to remaining sober.  
 
 Applicant attended 280 meetings at NA or Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) in his first 
year of sobriety. It is not unusual for an alcoholic or an addict to attend either NA or AA 
or both, as they share the same 12-step program. He currently attends NA or AA 
meetings about once a week. He has a support system in place with friends and family. 
His sponsor is the founder and director of a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center. He 
and Applicant first met in about 1981, when they were in jail together. He is a recovering 
drug addict who has been sober for 20 years. Applicant was very instrumental in 
assisting him in opening the center in 1998. He spent countless hours using his 
construction background in renovating an old building that became the center. Applicant 
has remained very involved in the center. The sponsor was a witness on Applicant’s 
behalf. He testified that Applicant is his best friend and they have supported each other. 
He described Applicant as upstanding, straightforward, trustworthy, and one of the 
finest men he has ever met.10 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 170-182; AE A-C, H, I. 
 
9 Tr. at 175, 182-185; GE 1; AE E. 
 
10 Tr. at 46-71; AE J. 
 
 
5 
 
 Eight witnesses, including those discussed above, testified on Applicant’s behalf. 
Character letters were also submitted. Applicant was universally praised by family, 
friends, co-workers, and supervisors as honest, hard working, trustworthy, and 
numerous other superlatives. All know about his drug and criminal background. He is 
strongly recommended for a security clearance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 30 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant was arrested more than 35 times and convicted 19 times between 
1980 and 1994. His criminal history raises both of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Four Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant was pressured or coerced into committing his 
criminal acts. AG ¶ 32(b) is not applicable. He did not totally deny any of his criminal 
 
7 
 
actions except for the Fugitive From Justice charges in 1991 and 1992, as alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.gg and1.jj. He credibly testified that he was innocent of those crimes and the 
charges were dismissed. AG ¶ 32(c) is applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.gg and1.jj. 
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs, been arrested, or charged since July 1997. 
Since then he returned to school and earned a Bachelor of Science degree and two 
Masters degrees. He returned home to live with his parents and regularly attends NA or 
AA meeting. He has a sponsor and a support network in place to help him maintain his 
sobriety. He has a great job that he loves and pays him a good salary. He is co-owner 
of an IT company. There is abundant evidence of successful rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) 
is applicable. Because of the sheer volume of Applicant’s drug and criminal history, 
even though he has been drug free for almost 11 years, I am unable to make an 
affirmative finding that his criminal past does not cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) is partially applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 52 years old. Since he 
was in high school his life has been defined by when he was on drugs or living clean. 
He started smoking marijuana in high school. He decided to start selling marijuana to 
fund his marijuana use. He sampled the heroin that he started selling and then became 
addicted. He was a drug dealer and an addict until not even his supplier could trust him 
anymore. He then became a career criminal to fund his habit, specializing in burglaries 
and shoplifting. He spent extended periods in jail and prison, and he was in various 
treatment programs, but he always returned to heroin. He was released to a work 
release in January 1995, followed by probation. Applicant stayed clean until September 
1996, when he fell victim to his old habits. Applicant picked an important personal day in 
 
8 
 
his life in July 1997 to begin his sobriety. He went back to jail and has not been involved 
in drugs or criminal activity since that date, giving him almost 11 years of sobriety. 
 
Since July 1997, Applicant has been the model of rehabilitation. He finally 
accepted the 12-step program endorsed by NA and attended 280 meeting his first year 
and continues to regularly attend meetings. He moved back with his parents. His 
father’s testimony was very moving. He and his wife now have their son back. Applicant 
pursued education with vigor. He thrived in his new profession. He has a support 
system in place to assist in his sobriety. 
 
I am convinced that the man who appeared before me on April 15, 2008 is 
everything his witnesses said he is. In contrast, prior to 1997, he was a drug addict/drug 
dealer/convicted felon who broke the law almost every day he was not incarcerated for 
more than 20 years. His company and his business partner took a chance and trust him 
with their financial and proprietary interests. That is commendable and so far it has paid 
huge dividends for both. When it comes to our nation’s secrets, I am not afforded the 
luxury of taking a chance on someone. Applicant’s drug and criminal record is so 
extensive, that even almost 11 years later, I am unable to state that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant him a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ff:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.gg:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.hh-1.ii:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.jj:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.kk-1.nn:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
