 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-00411
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant has failed to
mitigate the security concerns raised by the government’s information about his
finances and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is
denied.
On April 16, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance for his employment
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
On July 26, 2007, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 11 documents (Items 1 - 11) proffered in3
support of the government’s case.
2
under Guideline E (personal conduct), Guideline F (financial considerations), and
Guideline J (criminal conduct) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  More2
specifically, the government alleged that in 1995 Applicant was charged and convicted
of driving while intoxicated (DWI) (SOR ¶ 1.a), and that there are two active warrants for
his arrest issued in 1999 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.c). It was also alleged
Applicant owed $22,717 for 11 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.k), and that he
deliberately falsified his e-QIP by answering “no” to questions in section 23 (regarding
any arrests for drug or alcohol-related offenses) and to questions in section 28
(regarding debts greater than 180 days past due in the preceding seven years).
On September 12, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and admitted the
allegations of criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 1, and denied all of the allegations of
indebtedness in SOR 2. In his response to the allegations in SOR ¶ 3 that he falsified
his e-QIP answers, he uses the phrase “I admit;” however, it appears he is addressing
not the issue of falsification but the underlying conduct or facts. Accordingly, his
responses to SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b are entered as denials.
On January 31, 2008, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant
materials (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant3
received the FORM on February 6, 2008, and was given 30 days to file a response to
the FORM. He submitted nothing before the deadline, and the case was assigned to me
on May 2, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the exhibits
contained in the government’s FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 49 years old and seeks a security clearance for his employment with
a defense contractor, where he has worked as a security guard since November 2005.
According to his response to e-QIP question 26, Applicant was investigated for and/or
received a secret-level security clearance in about August 1985. He attended college
from 1976 until 1979, and is a twice-married father of three children, ages 24, 18, and
13. His first marriage began in March 1981 and ended by divorce in July 2001. His
second marriage began in October 2001. As of June 2005, he was separated from his
wife. (FORM, Item 4) In response to the SOR (Item 2) and to DOHA interrogatories
(Item 8), referred to a pending divorce, but provided no dates or other details. 
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
After Applicant submitted his e-QIP in April 2006, Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) investigators obtained a report of his credit history as of April 25,
2006 (FORM, Item 5). That report showed Applicant owed approximately $22,390 for
ten delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.k). All but one of the debts listed in Item 5 were
individual debts for which Applicant alone is responsible. A car repossession from 2006
resulted from non-payment on a joint car loan, presumably taken out with one of his
wives. (SOR ¶ 2.k) The credit report also showed Applicant’s home mortgage of
$111,370 was foreclosed in January 2005. There is no available information showing
that any of Applicant’s delinquent debts have been paid or otherwise resolved.
In April 1995, Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of DWI (SOR ¶
1.a). He was sentenced to 60 days in jail, of which 53 days was suspended. He also
was assessed fines and court costs of $1,800, his driver’s license was suspended for
one year, and was ordered to attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings for one
year. (FORM, Items 2 and 8)
As of May 2007, there were at least two active warrants for Applicant’s arrest.
For “failure to pay” (SOR ¶ 1.b) and “failure to answer” (SOR ¶ 1.c). (FORM, Item 9) In
his response to DOHA interrogatories in May 2007, he claimed he was unaware of the
warrants. Applicant indicated in response to the SOR that both warrants “should be
taken care of on Sept. 20, 07 (sic).” However, the record contains no information to
support or even explain the charges, and Applicant has submitted no further information
showing the warrants have been resolved.
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP (FORM, Item 4), he answered “no” to all of
the questions in section 23 (record of arrests) (SOR ¶ 3.a). In response to DOHA
interrogatories asking why he omitted his 1995 DWI arrest and conviction from the e-
QIP, Applicant stated he thought that arrest was no longer on his record. Applicant also
answered “no” to e-QIP section 27 (financial record in the preceding seven years) and
section 28 (debts greater than 90 or 180 days past due) (SOR ¶ 3.b). In response to
DOHA interrogatories which asked why he omitted his debts and repossessions from
the e-QIP, he blamed his ex-wife for the debts, and cited his pending divorce for his
assertion he did not know about the debts when he completed the form. (FORM, Item 8)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors4
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, these factor are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15, Guideline F (financial considerations) at AG
¶ 18, and Guideline J (criminal conduct) at AG ¶ 30.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.7
Analysis
Criminal Conduct. 
Applicant’s criminal conduct may be a security concern because, as stated in AG
¶ 30, 
5
[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Available information is sufficient to support the allegations that he engaged in criminal
conduct in April 1995 when he was arrested and convicted for DWI. However, the
information in support of the allegations that as of May 2007 there were two outstanding
warrants for his arrest on charges of failure to answer and failure to pay is insufficient to
prove criminal conduct. Nonetheless, his 1995 offense and the presence of the arrest
warrants require application of the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶ 31(a) (a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted) (emphasis added).
By contrast, because the lone provable offense occurred more than 12 years
ago, Applicant is entitled to mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) (emphasis added) The gravamen of this
case is in the security concerns about Applicant’s finances and truthfulness, as
discussed below. The security concerns presented by his criminal conduct are
mitigated.
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Applicant has denied all of the SOR allegations about his past due debts, relying
on his assertion that his ex-wife is somehow responsible for the debts. However, the
information presented by the OPM credit report is sufficient to support the SOR
allegations. The same credit report also shows that all but one of the debts listed in the
SOR is an individual account in his name alone. In response, Applicant has not
presented any reliable information to show he has a reasonable basis for disputing his
debts or they are otherwise not his responsibility. Nor is there any available information
to show he has acted to repay or otherwise resolve his debts. Accordingly, the record
supports application of the disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations). Likewise, there is no support for any of the mitigating conditions listed at
AG ¶ 20. I conclude Applicant has not met his burden of producing information that
would mitigate the security concerns raised by the government’s information about his
finances.
 See footnote 5, supra.8
6
Personal Conduct.
As stated in AG ¶ 15, “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.” 
The Applicant denied the allegations he intentionally omitted from the e-QIP his
1995 DWI and his past due debts. As to his DWI, he explained that he thought his DWI
was no longer on his record, thus implying he thought he did not have to list it. Under
some circumstances and with additional corroborating information, such an explanation
might support a conclusion that his omission was unintentional. However, that omission
can not be viewed in isolation. It must be evaluated along with his omission of adverse
information about his finances. Applicant claims his ex-wife is to blame for his
delinquencies and that he was unaware he had such debts. Without more, his
explanation is not plausible. 
All of the available information probative of this issue leads me to conclude
Applicant knowingly gave false answers in his SF 86 and that he was trying to mislead
the government about adverse information in his background. The foregoing requires
application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
The government satisfied its burden of producing sufficient reliable evidence to
support SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b. In response, Applicant has submitted no information that
would support application of any of the mitigating conditions under this guideline.
Accordingly, he has not mitigated the security concerns about his personal conduct. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E, F, and J. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Aside from
information about his age, education, and employment history contained in his SF 86,
there is nothing on which to base application of any of these factors. Applicant is 49
years old and must be presumed to be a mature adult. However, there is no available
information about his circumstances that would support application of any of the
remaining whole person factors. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all of8
available information bearing on Applicant’s finances and candor shows there are
doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests. Because
 See footnote 8, supra. 9
7
the protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, these
doubts must be resolved in favor of the national interest.9
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c For Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.k: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
