                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06016 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the United States to Egyptian parents. Her father is a 
professor at a Saudi Arabian university. She has relatives in Egypt. In 2000, she 
returned to the U.S. to attend a university. While at university, she traveled to visit her 
family during summer and winter school breaks. She has recently married a U.S. citizen 
and purchased a U.S. home. She has substantially more connections to the United 
States than to Egypt or Saudi Arabia.  
 
I conclude Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
2
                                                          
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 25, 2007, detailing security 
concerns under Foreign Influence.  
 
 On November 16, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On January 25, 2008, I was assigned the case. On 
February 11, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on 
February 21, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf, as did two additional witnesses. 
Applicant submitted Exhibits A through D, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. On March 7, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
On February 11, 2008, Notice of Hearing was mailed out for the hearing set on 
February 21, 2008. At the hearing, Applicant was informed of her right under the 
Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 
15 days notice and requested that the hearing proceed without delay. (Tr. 9)  
 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Egypt and Saudi Arabia. The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HEx) E I─IX and SA 1-VI. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1. of the 
SOR except for ¶ 1.b, which was denied because her sister was residing in Saudi 
Arabia not Egypt and ¶ 1.c, which was denied because it related to a sister and not to a 
brother.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old software engineer / analyst who has worked for a 
defense contractor since May 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Her 
job performance has been commendable to outstanding. (Ex. C and D) She is 
dependable, catches on quickly, has great tenacity, and is a valued team member. (Ex. 
D)  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
 
 In 1983, Applicant was born in the United States, while her father was obtaining 
his Ph.D. in chemistry at an American university. (Tr. 19) Her brother, who lives in the 
same area as she does, was born in Michigan, while her father was working on a post 
doctorate degree. (Tr. 21) Her brother, age 22, is currently a Ph.D. candidate having 
completed his undergraduate degree in pharmaceutical sciences. He lives on campus 
and on weekends, he spends time with Applicant. (Tr. 21, 33) 
 
 From 1986 to 1989, Applicant’s family resided in Kuwait where another sister 
was born. This sister, who is an Egyptian citizen, attends the same school as 
Applicant’s brother. Her sister is majoring in pharmaceutical sciences and hopes to 
obtain her Ph.D. (Tr. 21) Applicant sees her frequently. 
 
 Applicant’s family resided in Kuwait until the first Gulf War when they came to 
South Carolina. (Tr. 19) Applicant attended first grade in Kuwait. (Tr. 40) She left Kuwait 
when she was seven or eight. (Tr. 40) In 1992, the family moved to Saudi Arabia when 
her father obtained a job as a professor at a university. Applicant’s youngest sister, now 
age 13, was born while the family lived in Saudi Arabia. Her youngest sister has four or 
five years more before graduating from high school. (Tr.35-36) Her sister is very eager 
to move to the U.S.  
 
Her parents have long term Saudi Arabian visas that allow them to reside and be 
employed in Saudi Arabia. Applicant’s mother does not work outside of the home. When 
her father retires, her parents intend to move back to Egypt. Applicant has daily contact 
with her mother by email, telephone, and instant messaging. (Tr. 23) She has weekly 
contact with her father by instant messaging. (Ex. 2) Applicant’s mother and younger 
sister visited her in the U.S. for a month, six weeks before the hearing. (Tr. 93)  
 
 Most of her parent’s relatives live in Egypt. Applicant does not have contact with 
her father’s side of the family. (Tr. 22) When in country, Applicant sees her grandmother 
on her father’s side. (Tr. 37) Her mother has two brothers and two sisters who are 
citizens and residents of Egypt. Additionally, Applicant has eight cousins. (Tr. 37) Her 
uncles own an architectural consulting firm in Egypt. She talks with them five times a 
year by telephone. She is in communication with other relatives in Egypt on a weekly 
basis through instant messaging. Periodically, her uncles will call to check on her. (Tr. 
23) 
 
 From September 1992 through July 2000, from age nine to seventeen, Applicant 
resided with her family at the university in Saudi Arabia. (Tr. 40) She attended English 
school where classes were taught in English. (Tr. 112) Up until the sixth grade, teaching 
was from American books. (Tr. 112) Starting in sixth grade, Arabic was taken as a 
second language and school classes were taught using British books. Applicant was 
taught the same information that children in the U.K. were taught. (Tr.113) Her exams 
were British exams.  
 
In July 2000, Applicant returned to the U.S. to attend university where she 
obtained her bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electrical engineering. (Tr. 20, 44) Ever 
 
 
 
4
since 1992, when her family left the U.S. to go to Saudi Arabia, Applicant had wanted to 
return to the U.S. (Tr. 44) Between September 2000 and December 2005, when 
Applicant was attending a U.S. university, Applicant visited her family in Saudi Arabia 
during the summer and during school break in December. (Tr. 23) All travel has been on 
her U.S. passport, which is the only passport she possesses. (Tr. 52) 
 
Applicant was last in Saudi Arabia in 2006 when she spent three months, from 
December 2005 until March 2006, with her parents and sister. (Tr. 39, 42)The trips 
lasted a month or less. Now that she is no longer a student, she visits her family once a 
year, during the summer, when they are in Egypt. (Tr. 23) Applicant has no intention of 
visiting Saudi Arabia again. Any future trips to visit family will be to Egypt.  
 
In July 2006, Applicant traveled to Egypt for three weeks to visit her uncles, aunt, 
and cousins. As a university professor, her father has breaks during the summer, which 
is when her parents and sister travel to Egypt. (Tr. 24) In 2006, she lived with her 
parents who have a residence in Cairo. From mid-June 2007 to mid-July 2007, 
Applicant last visited Egypt when she visited family and married. 
 
In January 2008, Applicant filed for her parents to obtain green cards. Before 
applying for a green card for a parent an individual must be 21 years old and a $2,500 
fee per person must be submitted at the time of the application. (Tr. 32, 112) When 
Applicant turned 21 she and her brother were both in college and her parent’s finances 
preventing the initiation of the process at that time. (Tr. 112)  
 
 Applicant has no financial or business interests in any foreign country. (Tr. 47) 
Applicant’s only connection to Saudi Arabia is that her father works there. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant met her husband when they were attending university. (Tr. 29) He grew 
up in Kansas and his family all lives in Kansas. His father is a doctor and his mother 
does not work outside the home. (Tr. 82) Her husband has his master’s degree and is 
completing his Ph.D. (Tr. 48) They married in July 2007 in Egypt. In February 2007, she 
and her husband purchased their home for $188,000. (Ex. A) She has $8,188 in a 401 
(k) retirement account, $7,000 in her checking account, and a substantial amount in her 
savings account. (Ex. B, Tr. 26, 47) She is a registered voter in the U.S. (Tr. 62) She 
intends to make the U.S. her permanent home. (Tr. 45)  
 
 Even though the government of Egypt treats children born to Egyptian father’s as 
Egyptian, Applicant would have to apply for a visa if she stayed in Egypt more than six 
months. (Tr. 51) When she turned 21, she could have applied for Egyptian citizenship, 
but chose not to. (Tr. 51) Applicant would not want to live in Egypt permanently for it is 
too complicated and she certainly does not wish to live in Saudi Arabia. She enjoys her 
life in the U.S. more. (Tr. 59)  
 
Egypt 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Egypt is a republic with a strong 
executive. The United States and Egypt enjoy a strong and friendly relationship based 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
on shared mutual interests in Middle East peace and stability, strengthening trade 
relations, and promoting regional security.2 The threat of terrorism in Egypt remains 
high and transnational terrorist groups and local terrorist groups pose threats in Egypt 
despite Egypt’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists and “Zero tolerance” policy on 
extremism.3 In 2003, Egypt discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot against U.S. 
interests.4 Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly, coordinated 
terrorist bombings, which cause many deaths and hundreds of injuries, including U.S. 
citizens.5 “Although the Egyptian government took measures against the perpetrators of 
the 2004 and 2005 attacks, a 2006 bombing reflects a persistent, indigenous threat of 
terror activities.6 
 
Terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities to exploit and undermine 
U.S. national security interests. Terrorist organizations currently target the U.S. for 
intelligence collection through human espionage and other means.7 Terrorist groups 
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.  
 
The State Department notes the Egypt’s human rights record is poor and serious 
abuses continue in many areas.8 Problems include: restriction of freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, and association, denial of fair trial, lack of due process, limitations on 
the right of citizens to change their government, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, 
poor prison conditions, political prisoners and detainees, torture, as well as executive 
branch limitation on an independent judiciary.9 Torture in Egyptian detention centers is 
pervasive.10  
 
Opposition parties continue to lodge credible complaints about election 
manipulation by the government even though recent elections were more transparent 
2 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, March 2007. (HEx E I  at  9) 
3 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, March 2007. (HEx E I); U.S. Department of State, Patterns of 
Global Terrorism 2003, April 29, 2004 (HEx E IV); and U.S. Department of State, Appendix B – Background 
Information of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations, April 29, 2004 (HEx E V) 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Patterns of Global Terrorism 2003, April 29, 2004 (HEx E IV) 
 
5 Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2 – Country Reports: Middle East and North Africa 
Overview, April 30, 2007. (Ex E III) 
 
6 Id. at 4. 
 
7 Statement for the Record by Michelle Van Cleave from the national Counterintelligence Executive, Before the 
House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, Border Security and Claims, Hearing on Sources and Methods of 
Foreign National Engaged in Economic and Military Espionage. (HEx E VII) 
 
8 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2006 – Egypt, March 6, 2007. (HEx E 
IX) 
 
9 Id. 
 
10 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, March 2007. (HEx E I  at  5) 
 
 
 
 
6
                                                          
and better executed than in the past.11 There remain significant restrictions on the 
political process and freedom of expression for non-governmental organizations.12 The 
government of Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers to be Egyptian 
citizens.13 
 
Saudi Arabia 
 
Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the Al Saud family. The central institution of 
the Saudi Arabian government is the monarchy.14 There are no political parties or 
national elections.15 There is no right to peaceful change of the government. The 
following human rights problems exist: significant restriction of civil liberties ─ freedoms 
of speech, press, assembly, association, and movement; arbitrary arrest and detention, 
sometimes incommunicado; infliction of severe pain by judicially sanctioned corporal 
punishment; beatings and other abuses; inadequate conditions at prison and detention 
centers; and arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, and correspondence.16 
 
There is a widespread perception of serious corruption and a lack of government 
transparency, as well as legal and societal discrimination and violence against 
women.17 Discrimination is faced by other religious, ethnic, and minority groups. There 
are strict limitations on workers rights, especially for foreign workers. 
 
The religious police (Mutawwa’in) (MOI) harass, abuse, and detain citizens and 
foreigners.18 The government sentences criminals to punishments according to its 
interpretation of Shari’a (Islamic religious law). Corporal punishments provided by law 
include public executions by beheading, amputations, lashings, and other measures 
deemed appropriate by the judicial authorities. The Basic Law guarantees the 
inviolability of homes and the privacy of correspondence.19 However, custom officials 
routinely open mail searching for contraband.  
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 U.S Department of Sate, Consular Information Sheet – Egypt, June 20, 2007. (HEx E II) 
 
14 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2006: Saudi Arabia, March 6, 2007. (HEx 
SA I) 
 
15 U.S. Department of State, Background Notes: Saudi Arabia, June, 2007. (HEx SA II) 
 
16 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2006: Saudi Arabia, March 6, 2007. (HEx 
SA I) 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Id. 
 
 
 
7
tine people.  
                                                          
The U.S. and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional security, oil 
exports, and sustainable development. Following September 11, 2001, relations 
between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. have been strained. Fifteen of the suicide bombers 
in the terrorist attacks were Saudi citizens. In May 2003, suicide bombers killed 35 
people, including nine Americans, in attacks in the capital. In November 2003, a terrorist 
attack on a housing compound left 18 dead and more than 100 injured. In June 2004, 
terrorists killed three Americans. In December 2004, terrorist attacks on the U.S. 
Consulate killed five.  
 
The Department of State has issued a travel warning for Saudi Arabia due to 
concerns about possible terrorist activity directed at American citizens and U.S. 
interests.20 Terrorists continue to target housing compounds and other establishments 
where westerners may be located.  
 
The Saudi government has moved to monitor and enforce its anti-money 
laundering and terrorist finance laws, regulations, and guidelines.21 The Saudi 
government has permitted or encouraged fund-raising in Saudi Arabia by charitable 
Islamic groups and foundations linked to Al-Qaeda.22 Saudi Arabia has been unwilling 
to publically disseminate statistics regarding money laundering prosecutions. Saudi 
Arabia recognizes the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) as the legitimate 
representative of the Pales 23
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
20 U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning : Saudi Arabia, December 19, 2007. (HEx SA III) 
21 Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 2 – Country Reports: Middle East and North Africa 
Overview, April 30, 2007. (HEx SA VI) 
22 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Saudi Arabia: Current Issues and U.S. Relations, August 2, 
2006. (HEx SA IV) 
23 Id. 
 
 
 
8
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Under AG & 6, foreign contacts and interests, may be a security concern  
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
I have considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions. Conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying are listed under AG & 7. 
AG & 7(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
 
 
 
9
coercion.” and AG & 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information,” apply. 
 
Applicant’s parents are Egyptian citizens. Applicant’s father is a professor 
teaching at a Saudi Arabian university. Her mother does not work outside the home. 
Applicant’s younger sister, age 13, lives with her parents. Applicant has frequent contact 
with her mother. While attending university in the United States, Applicant visited her 
parents during summer and winter breaks from classes. Traveling home during school 
breaks is what students do. All travel was on her U.S. passport, which is the only 
passport she possesses. Applicant’s loyalty is to the U.S. rather than Saudi Arabia or 
Egypt and her only connection with the country is her father’s teaching position there. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.” and AG ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either 
because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” apply to Applicant’s parents and foreign 
relatives.  
 
Applicant’s brother and sister attend university in the U.S., a short distance from 
where Applicant lives with her husband. She sees them frequently. Her brother was 
born in Michigan and her sister was born in Kuwait. Applicant’s younger sister is most 
anxious to come to the U.S. and will do so when she finishes high school. Applicant has 
recently started the process of obtaining green cards for her parents. Applicant was 
unable to initiate the process before turning 21 and the financial aspect of paying the 
application fee prevented earlier action.  
 
Applicant has relatives in Egypt with whom she has regular contact. In 2007, 
when she married a U.S. citizen, the marriage took place in Egypt. Applicant’s uncles 
run an architectural design business and, as uncles are want to do, maintain regular 
contact with Applicant to check up on her. The contact with her mother and her mother’s 
relatives in Egypt is frequent. Her contact with her father’s relatives in Egypt is not. 
While danger certainly exists for all who reside in Egypt, Applicant, her parents, and 
relatives are in no greater danger than any other individual living and working there. 
 
Applicant has no desire to live permanently in Egypt. She enjoys her life in the 
U.S. more. If she stays in Egypt for more than six months she must apply for a visa. 
When she turned 21, she could have applied for Egyptian citizenship, but chose not to. 
She has made her chose to make her life with her new husband in the U.S. They have 
purchased a home together and all her finances are in the U.S.  
 
 
 
 
10
 There is little likelihood Applicant has any conflict of interest, but if she did it is 
clear, due to her loyalty to the U.S. and the likely minimal possibility of the conflict; she 
would resolve it in favor of the U.S.  
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):     
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Egypt and her parents living 
in Saudi Arabia and the heavy burden an Applicant carries when she has family 
members in a foreign country. As indicated in the statement of facts, there are many 
other countervailing, positive attributes to Applicant’s life as a U.S. citizen that weigh 
towards granting a clearance. Applicant has close ties to the United States. Her closest 
family member is her husband, a U.S. citizen born and raised in the U.S., who lives with 
her. Additionally, her brother and sister are nearby, attending a U.S. university. Because 
her husband and siblings live in the United States, they are not vulnerable to coercion or 
exploitation by a foreign power, except possibly indirectly through relatives, who still live 
in Egypt or Saudi Arabia.  
 
Applicant was born in the United States, spent her formative years living abroad 
attending British schools, and returned to the U.S. to attend university. She has lived in 
the U.S. since 2000. Applicant and her husband purchased a home in February 2007. 
Although her parents live in Saudi Arabia and she has relatives living in Egypt and she 
has frequent telephone and electronic contact with them, she has no desire to ever live 
permanently in either country. She may visit relatives in Egypt in the future, but her trips 
will never be as frequent as when she was a college student visiting her parents during 
summer and winter breaks from classes. Her marriage to a U.S. citizen reinforces the 
decision that her life is now in the U.S. 
 
The “whole person” analysis in a Guideline B case should include “the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and circumstance[s] (including the realistic potential for 
 
 
 
11
exploitation).” Applicant’s potential for exploitation is low. I base this finding on her 
credible and sincere testimony, and I do not believe she would compromise national 
security, or otherwise comply with any threats or pressure emanating from Saudi Arabia 
or Egypt. Although there is a significant risk of terrorism in both countries she has such 
deep loyalties to the U.S. and U.S. family members, she would resolve those pressures 
in favor of the U.S. interest. See AG ¶ 8(b). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-i:  For Applicant 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
