1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-06212
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On, August 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a Guideline E, personal
conduct security concern. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 7, 2007, admitted the allegations,
and requested an administrative determination. On October 29, 2007, department
counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received it on October
30, 2007, and did not reply. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2008. I have
reviewed the FORM, and have concluded that eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Applicant allegedly failed to place some license plates in a the department’s evidence locker.1
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old married man with four children, ranging in age from six
to 17. He earned a bachelor of science degree in computer and information sciences in
1989. He is a private investigator and owns a limousine service. He is seeking to work
for a defense contractor as a background investigator.
From April 1985 to February 2004, Applicant was a police officer. During that
time, he received a combination of 15 departmental awards and certificates for
outstanding work (Item 2 at 2).
From 1990 to 2006, Applicant operated a part-time business that among other
things placed police officers in part-time security guard positions at a local automobile
dealership. (Item 5 at 4). Under his agreement with the dealership, Applicant recruited
police officers to work at the dealership, screened them, and managed the security
guard payroll (Item 4 at 34).
In January 2003, a police officer who had used Applicant’s services filed a
complaint with the police department’s internal affairs division (IAD) accusing Applicant
of improperly retaining a percentage of his security guard salary. According to state
regulations, police officers who operated security guard placement companies could
retain as commission part of the salary of anyone they place so long as their companies
were licensed. Applicant’s company was not licensed (Item 5 at 4). He was unaware of
the licensing requirement (Id.).
The IAD also investigated Applicant for using a subordinate to sign his leave slips
instead of his supervisor, and mishandling of evidence  (Item 5 at 4). During the course1
of the investigation, administrative charges were filed against Applicant (Id.). While the
investigation was pending, the auto dealership offered him a full-time position as its
security manager. He accepted the position in January 2004, quit his job with the police
department, and worked at the auto dealership for slightly more than two years (Item 4
at 14). He did not resign from the police department under an agreement (Item 4 at 34). 
Applicant has never seen a copy of the IAD file (Item 2 at 1), and it is not
included in the record evidence. All of the record information regarding the
circumstances of Applicant’s police department resignation stems from his security
clearance application disclosure, and his later discussion with an investigative agent. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
3
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” Here, Applicant’s SOR admissions establish the government’s allegation
that he left his job as a police officer in 2004 while under investigation for operation of a
job placement business without a license, erroneous leave slip execution, and failure to
place evidence in an evidence locker. 
No record evidence indicates that Applicant’s operation of his business without
the proper license was anything more than an administrative oversight. A police officer
who obtained a job as a part-time security guard with the help of Applicant’s placement
company alleged that he improperly retained part of his hourly security guard salary.
Upon reviewing the record evidence, I conclude Applicant did nothing improper by
retaining part of the contract security guard’s salary for placing him. Instead, he erred in
failing to obtain a license for his job placement service.
Applicant’s contention that he was unaware of the licensing requirement was not
challenged in the record. Also, the government’s entire case rests on information he
voluntarily disclosed. Under these circumstances, I conclude his contention was
credible.
Applicant’s failure to submit leave requests properly has limited probative value in
assessing his security clearance worthiness absent any evidence regarding the
4
frequency of the conduct or the circumstances under which it occurred. Similarly, no
evidence exists to assess the seriousness of Applicant’s failure to store the license
plates in the department’s evidence locker. This oversight also has limited probative
value. I conclude Applicant’s erroneous leave slip execution and failure to place
evidence in the department’s evidence locker were minor administrative errors. 
Before the IAD investigation, Applicant’s career as a police officer was
exemplary. There is no evidence of misconduct either before or after the investigation.
Consequently, although Applicant’s mistakes constitute a pattern of misconduct, they
are not sufficient enough when combined with all of the available information to support
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment or untrustworthiness under AG
¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d), as the government alleges. Applicant has mitigated the personal
conduct security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a), as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I addressed the whole person factors in the Personal Conduct section of the
decision. Upon considering these factors, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the
security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1b: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
