1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )           ISCR Case No. 07-08147
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 19 October 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines E and H.  Applicant answered the SOR 16 November 2007, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 19 December 2007, and I convened a hearing
29 January 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 6 February 2008.
 
2
For example, he updated his addresses, his employment history, his schooling, his foreign travel, and his
marital status—having just married the month before. He reported that he had been fired from his previous
job in March 2004 for failing to follow company policy.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the Guideline E allegations, but admitted his March 2004 use of
marijuana under Guideline H. He is a 38-year-old security assistant employed by a
defense contractor since March 2004. He has not previously held a clearance.
Applicant first completed a clearance application in 2002, when a previous
employer required it for informational purposes. That application was never submitted
for investigation. When Applicant first applied for an industrial clearance in November
2004 (G.E. 1), he was using a paper copy of the earlier application as he completed the
new application electronically, updating entries as he went along.  He deliberately2
concealed his marijuana use in March 2004 by answering “no” to question 27 (illegal
drug use, last seven years). He also deliberately failed to disclose some financial
difficulties by answering “no” to question 39 (financial delinquencies, over 90 days). In
fact, he had used marijuana in March 2004, while on vacation with old friends, and while
employed as a background investigator for a government contractor. He also had three
delinquent debts totaling $615 currently past due. 
Applicant denies he intended to withhold this information from the government,
but the record belies that claim. When completing his clearance application in 2002, he
had answered “yes” to the drug question, and had disclosed marijuana use in high
school—use which he was told was beyond the scope of the question. He was aware of
the three delinquent debts, but felt justified in omitting them because he had reasons for
thinking each of them unjust. He attributed his one-time marijuana use to being with old
friends, with whom he felt comfortable, and joining them when the marijuana was
offered. He does not intend to use marijuana again.
In March 2004, Applicant was fired from his job as a background investigator for
a government contractor for falsifying two investigative reports. The two reports involved
employees with temporary appointments (i.e., with expiration dates). In each case,
Applicant noted the temporary appointment, but did not record the expiration date of the
appointment. He recalls having done so previously without comment, but in this
instance, his temporary supervisor returned the reports to him and directed him to
obtain the correct information. Applicant concluded that the information was not worth
the effort of traveling to the records location, so polled his coworkers about the typical
length of a temporary appointment, and made up dates for the two reports. The
company considered this to be falsification, and he was fired. Applicant did not contest
the firing. 
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
4
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
3
Applicant’s character references (A.E. A) and employment references (A.E. B),
consider him worthy for access to classified information. None appear aware of the
issues raised in the SOR.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. He deliberately concealed his illegal
drug use and his financial issues from the government.  He did so knowing that these4
¶25.(a) any drug abuse. . .; (c) illegal drug possession, including. . . purchase. . . ; (c) any illegal drug use5
after being granted a security clearance; 
6
¶26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶26.(b). a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; . . . (3) an appropriate period7
of abstinence;
4
issues were of security concern to the government. Further, his falsification of the
investigative reports—and more pertinently, his willingness to substitute his own
judgment about what level of effort was required—casts serious doubt on his judgment.
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant’s falsifications prohibited the
government from evaluating his illegal drug use and financial issues in a timely fashion.
Finally, while his eventual disclosures may have been forthright, they cannot be
considered prompt.
Applicant’s failure to disclose his illegal drug use and financial issues
demonstrates a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The government has an
interest in examining all relevant and material adverse information about an Applicant
before making a clearance decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully
disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be
prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information
about himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
The government also established a case for disqualification under Guideline H.5
However, Applicant mitigated the security concerns. His one-time use in March 2004 is
both distant in time and infrequent.  His abstinence from drug use—now nearly four6
years—is adequate to demonstrate an intent to refrain from drug use in the future.  I7
conclude Applicant is unlikely to use illegal drugs in the future. Accordingly, I resolve
Guideline H for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
5
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
