 
 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                             )  ISCR Case No. 07-08884 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-QIP), on December 26, 
2006. On October 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 21, 2007. He submitted a 
supplemental answer on December 8, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 16, 
 
 2
2008, and I received the case assignment on January 17, 2008. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on January 25, 2008, scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2008. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. I held the record 
open until February 22, 2008 to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
documents. Applicant timely submitted AE N through S without objection, which were 
forwarded to me by Department Counsel by letters dated February 22, 2008 (Exhibit 
(Ex.) I and II). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 21, 2008. 
The record closed on February 22, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., and 1.c. – 1.j. He denied SOR ¶ 1.b. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
   
Applicant is a 44-year-old supply technician chief, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since August 2003. Tr. 21-22. He graduated from high school in 
June 1982, and did not pursue higher education. Tr. 19. He is a first-time applicant for a 
security clearance. Tr. 22-24. 
 
Applicant married his wife in March 1989, separated from her in September 
2001, and was granted a final divorce in July 2007. He is currently unmarried. He and 
his former wife have two daughters, ages 23 and 18. Applicant continues to provide 
support for his 18-year-old daughter, who is attending her senior year in high school. 
When she graduates, his support obligation ends. Tr. 25-26.  
 
The SOR alleges a total of ten debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.j.) Apart from three tax 
liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.g.) and a foreclosure judgment (SOR ¶ 1.f.), the remaining 
six debts alleged in the SOR consist of collection/charged off accounts owing 
approximately $17,340. The alleged debts are supported by the government’s evidence 
and Applicant’s admissions. Response to SOR, GE 2, GE 5. Applicant provided 
documentation that the tax lien owed in SOR ¶ 1.b. had been paid. Response to SOR, 
AE E. The debt reflected in the foreclosure judgment (SOR ¶ 1.f.) was satisfied by the 
foreclosure sale. Tr. 66-73. GE 2, AE K. 
 
Applicant has paid or settled the debts reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.e., and 1.h. AE N, 
AE O. He has addressed debts reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.i., and 1.j. by seeking 
the services of a debt management company and has established a debt consolidation 
plan. He has established a monthly payment plan to the debt management company 
which is paid by direct debit from his bank account. AE Q, AE S. With regard to the 
remaining tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.g., Applicant has contacted the 
Internal Revenue Service and resolved his tax problems by filing his returns and/or 
setting up a payment plan. AE P, AE R.  
 
 
 3
                                                          
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the loss of his job in 2002, and a 
costly separation and divorce which spanned a six-year period. Applicant testified that 
the majority of the charge accounts were attributable to his former wife. Additionally, his 
former wife quit her job in 2001 and withdrew the funds from her 401k account, leaving 
him with her tax liability as a result of early withdrawal. Tr. 96-97 
  
Applicant’s annual salary is $57,672. His monthly budget reflects a net remainder 
of $831 after all his monthly bills are paid. Tr. 102, AE N. 
 
A supervisor from Applicant’s company testified on his behalf. The supervisor 
holds a top secret clearance and described Applicant as a very good employee, who 
can be trusted and counted on to perform whatever duties are assigned. He 
recommended Applicant for a security clearance. Tr. 108-114. 
 
Applicant submitted two reference letters from two work-related supervisory 
personnel. These letters described Applicant as “very security conscious,” “first to 
volunteer for additional work,” “first-class professional,” “performance has been 
outstanding,” “will do what it takes to get the job done,” and possesses “integrity” and 
“patriotism.” Both supervisory personnel recommended Applicant for a security 
clearance.AE B, AE C. 
 
Policies 
 
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines which must be considered in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Foremost are the 
Disqualifying and Mitigating conditions under each adjudicative guideline applicable to 
the facts and circumstances of the case. However, the guidelines are not viewed as 
inflexible ironclad rules of law. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. Each decision 
must also reflect a fair and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in 
Section 6.3 of the Directive,1 and the whole person concept.2 Having considered the 
record evidence as a whole, I conclude Guideline F (Financial Considerations) is the 
applicable relevant adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
1  Directive, Section 6.3. “Each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense 
determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent 
criteria and adjudication policy in enclosure 2 . . .” 
 
             2  Directive ¶ 2(a)  “. . . The adjudication process is the careful weighing of a number of variables 
known as the whole person concept. Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination. . . .” The whole person 
concept includes the consideration of the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; the motivation for the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. . . .” 
 
 
 4
                                                          
Burden of Proof 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3 The government has the initial burden of proving 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. To meet its burden, the government must 
establish a prima facie case by substantial evidence.4 The responsibility then shifts to 
the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one 
has a right to a security clearance, the applicant carries the ultimate burden of 
persuasion.5  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, 
therefore, has a compelling interest to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as 
his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
Conclusions 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),7 the government’s concern is that 
an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations dating back to at 
least 2002. Since then, he has accumulated ten debts, which were substantiated by the 
government’s evidence and discussed above. Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 
19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; apply in this case. 
 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  ISCR Case No. 98-0761 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999) (Substantial evidence is more than a 
scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the evidence); ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 
2006) (Substantial evidence is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record); Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
5  Egan, supra n.6, at 528, 531. 
 
6  See Id; Directive Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b). 
 
7  Guidelines ¶ 18. 
 
 
 5
                                                          
Applicant experienced a loss of income after losing his job in 2002, and 
undergoing a costly separation and divorce. The financial toll of this unexpected income 
loss and divorce-related costs placed Applicant in a precarious financial situation from 
which he is still recovering. These facts demonstrate circumstances beyond his control.  
 
 Applicant provided documentation demonstrating that he paid or resolved all of 
his debts either by contacting the creditors directly or by retaining the services of a debt 
management company. He has established realistic payment plans with all his creditors, 
and has remained current on those plans. His evidence reflects he has the resolve and 
wherewithal to pay down his debts.  
  
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,8 I conclude that two of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) 
Guidelines ¶ 20(b): The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances; and FC MC ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; apply in this 
case.  
 
He presented evidence showing he dealt responsibly with his financial 
obligations as demonstrated by contacting his creditors and resolving his debts. 
Applicant’s evidence sustains a finding that he is financially responsible and has taken 
control of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems 
are not likely to be a concern in the future.   
 
 I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines. I applied the 
whole person concept. I specifically considered Applicant’s age, education, his maturity, 
his years of working for a defense contractor, work performance, commitment to his 
family, and his demeanor and conduct during his hearing. Considering the totality of 
Applicant’s circumstances, he demonstrated sufficient judgment and trustworthiness in 
the handling of his financial affairs. In short, he has mitigated the security concerns 
raised.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j.:  For Applicant 
 
8  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
 6
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
