1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 07-09153
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on June 10, 2004.
On November 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under foreign influence
(Guideline B). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on January 9, 2008. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on March 5, 2008, and the hearing was held on April 2, 2008. Based
on a careful evaluation of all the evidence in the record, Applicant’s eligibility of security
clearance access is granted. 
2
At the hearing, the government submitted three exhibits (GE). The third exhibit
(GE 4, administrative notice exhibit) contains facts from United States Government
agency publications that describe the government of Iran, its human rights record, and
the various difficulties U.S. citizens face in traveling to the country. At the hearing,
testimony was taken from Applicant and four witnesses. He also submitted fifteen
exhibits (AE A - AE O). DOHA received the transcript on April 10, 2008.
Rulings on Procedure
I am taking administrative notice of facts recited in Department Counsel’s
memorandum. These facts have been culled from U.S. State Departments listed at the
end of the government’s Administrative Notice Memorandum. The underlying
documents will be attached to the record, but are not admitted as government exhibits. 
At the beginning of the hearing, Applicant moved to amend SOR 1.c. (Tr. 4) by
adding a sentence to the existing allegation. The amendment reads as follows, “One
half-brother (21 years old) has been approved to immigrate to the U.S. in 2001, but is
awaiting his visa from the U.S. State Department.” The government did not object to the
proposed amendment. Pursuant to E3.1.17. of the Directive, the amendment was
granted. (Tr. 4, 5)
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges in paragraph 1 that Applicant’s ties and travel to Iran raise
foreign influence concerns. He admitted subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.f. He
denied subparagraphs 1.b. and 1.e. due to changed circumstances. The underlying
reason for the denial to subparagraph 1.b. is that his father has been a United States
(U.S.) citizen since 1984. (AE F) His mother is a citizen of Iran living with Applicant in
this country, and plans to become a U.S. citizen when she is eligible in May 2008. She
has a U.S. permanent resident card. (AE G) Even though Applicant’s brother-in-law is a
citizen of Iran (SOR 1.e.), he is now living with Applicant in the U.S., and expects to
apply for U.S. citizenship in October 2009. He has his U.S. permanent resident card.
(AE I) 
Applicant is 38 years old and married. He is employed as a computer
programmer for a defense contractor located at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL).
He has held his position since his hire in June 2004. He seeks a secret security
clearance.
In December 1969, Applicant was born in Iran, and is a member of the Baha’i
religious faith. See, AE L. As I shall discuss later, during his childhood, he spent a
considerable amount of time at a neighbor’s home, where he developed a close
friendship with witness B (Applicant’s best friend) and witness A (Applicant’s future
wife). 
 AE D is verification of Applicant’s arrest in 1985. 1
 The Iranian court advised the ministry of education of Applicant’s arrest. As a result, Applicant could not2
enroll in the school he had been attending, and had to enroll in another school to complete his last two years
of high school. 
3
Applicant’s parents, resident citizens of Iran, separated in about 1974 when
Applicant was five or six. His father immigrated to the U.S. in 1978, and became a U.S.
citizen in 1984. (AE I) Applicant’s father is 88 years old, and has lived in the central part
of the U.S. since 1979. (answer to SOR) Applicant’s mother remarried and bore a son in
(circa) 1980 and another son in approximately 1987. After their stepfather passed away
in 1988, Applicant’s two half-brothers viewed him as a fatherly figure and big brother. 
Before his successful exit from Iran in 1991, Applicant tried unsuccessfully to
leave the country three times in the 1980s. In 1983, he was 13 years old when he was
supposed to travel to a location to be smuggled out of Iran. At a checkpoint along the
way to meet the smuggler, someone discovered Applicant did not speak the local
dialect. He was removed from a bus, and spent a week in detention where he was
interrogated and beaten by security officials in their effort to obtain details of the
smuggling operation. (Tr. 153-155) He revealed nothing. 
Applicant tried to leave Iran a second time in 1985. This time he managed to get
a little bit closer to the Iranian border (with Turkey), but had to turn back due to adverse
weather conditions. He was 15 years old when security officials came to his house and
arrested him.  1
In December 1987, Applicant tried a third time to escape. (Tr. 156) With the help
of his mother, who knew he was determined to get out of the country, he found a
smuggler (with a successful smuggling background) who agreed to take him and five
others to Turkey. On their way, Iranian security stopped and arrested them. AE E
reflects that Applicant was arrested on December 22, 1987 and released to his parents’
custody in April 1988.  During his detention, he was beaten regularly but disclosed2
nothing. 
In 1991, Applicant received his bachelor’s degree in computer science and
mathematics. (Tr. 148; GE 1) During Thanksgiving 1991, he was finally permitted to
leave Iran. Although he had been eligible for a green card (permanent resident card)
since he was 13 years old, he could not get a passport to leave Iran until he was about
22 years old. He was required to return to Iran for five successive years to satisfy a
military exemption law applicable to the eldest son in a family with no father/husband.
Under Iranian law in 1991/1992, in a family with no father/husband, the eldest son was
exempt from serving in the military so he could take care of his mother. This exemption
was temporary and had to be renewed yearly for five years, so one’s passport was valid
for only one year. At the end of the five-year period, the exemption became permanent
 Applicant indicated in GE 3 that his exemption ended in 1995. 3
 GE 1 reveals she was living in a southwestern city of the U.S. in June 2004.4
 Applicant also has two half-brothers from his father’s first marriage. They were born in Iran and are5
naturalized U.S. citizens. (Tr. 216)
4
along with the passport. (Tr. 169)  Applicant surrendered his Iranian passport in October3
2006.
Applicant received additional computer training in the U.S. between 1992 and
1994. (AE A) He was granted his U.S. citizenship in October 1997. (GE 1) He has
worked as a software developer for six employers around the U.S. A major reason
Applicant moved to the upper northwest location in the U.S. in 1999 was his desire to
find more permanent employment with benefits that his previous contractor positions did
not offer him. (Tr. 174) In June 2004, Applicant was hired by NRL. 
In response to his oldest half-brother’s request, Applicant returned to Iran to
attend his half-brother’s wedding. (Tr. 170) Applicant does not consider himself close to
either half-brother. They speak to each other maybe three times a year on birthdays and
holidays. (Tr. 171-174) The last e-mail Applicant received from his half-brothers was in
2006. (Tr. 218)
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Iran, but has lived with Applicant since June
2007. She has been a resident of the U.S since 2003; she has her U.S. resident card.
(AE G) She intends to obtain her U.S. citizenship, although learning English has been a
challenge for her. Previously, she was living with Applicant one out of every six months.4
After each stay, she returned to Iran to take care of Applicant’s youngest half-brother.
When the half-brother reached 21, she moved in with Applicant permanently in June
2007. Applicant’s mother calls her two sons (Applicant’s half-brothers) approximately
once a month, and they call her once every other month. (Tr. 205)  She has no plans to5
return to Iran. (Tr. 203) Although Applicant sponsored his youngest half-brother for
immigration (AE K), he is aware it takes up to 10 years before siblings are granted
authorization to immigrate. 
On October 10, 2006, Applicant shredded his Iranian passport; this act was
witnessed by his employer’s supervisor, the government supervisor, and the facility
security officer. (AE B) On the same day, Applicant signed a statement stating that, “. . .
I would like to relinquish my Iranian citizenship in favor of a sole United States
citizenship.” (AE C) A requirement for working at NRL by employees from foreign
countries is to relinquish their foreign passports. (Tr. 185) At some time before he
shredded his passport in October 2006 (date not revealed in the record), Applicant went
to the Iranian Interest Section (of the Pakistani Embassy) to turn in his passport. The
Iranian officials punched a hole in the passport and returned it to him. He opined the
passport was punched to alert Iranian immigration officials that the passport was
 For several years following their father’s death, they assumed his death resulted from natural causes.6
However, as the years passed, they became less certain and more concerned because of the different
reasons the Iranian government supplied for his death. (Tr. 85-88)
5
defective, and lead to possible detention of the passport holder at the Iranian border.
(Tr. 187-189)
Applicant hates the Iranian government because of their mistreatment of their
people, their involvement in terrorist activities, and the authoritarian form of government.
(Tr. 193) If Applicant ever became the target of pressure, he stated:
I would notify the security officer first. But anybody who knows me knows
that if you try to apply pressure on me for doing that I believe it’s not right,
you will get the exact opposite. It will make me more determined not to
help them, th[a]n if they didn’t put pressure. So if they arrested my half-
brothers and send me threat that they will kill them, there is nothing I can
do about it. I will be sad, but that will not persuade me to do anything that I
believe is wrong. (Tr. 194)
Applicant would eagerly bear arms against Iran. (Tr. 195) 
None of Applicant’s relatives have ever been employees of or agents of the
Iranian government. Witness A’s father was in the Iranian Air Force for more than 20
years, but died in 1988.
Witness A, Applicant’s Muslim wife, is 33 years old. She was born in Iran. She
lives with Applicant. She has a bachelor of science degree in material engineering, and
has several credits toward a fine arts degree. She currently is an assistant manager at a
clothing store in the area. She has known Applicant for approximately 25 years, having
met him when she was about eight years old, and he was 13 at the time. Her brother
(witness B) was Applicant’s classmate in school. Even though witness A was conscious
that Applicant’s religion was different from her religion, the two families had a good
relationship. 
When witness A was 23 years old (1997), she, her mother and witness B (her
brother) were smuggled out of Iran. Their departure became imminent after A’s brother
and their mother received threats of harm for asking questions about their father’s
demise.  Witness A’s mother was detained for 3 days as a result of her informal6
investigation into her husband’s death.
About 10 days after witness B was threatened (Tr. 88), he, witness A, and their
mother sold what they could, then exited Iran. They left their house and some property
behind. After entering Turkey, they flew to Thailand for about three weeks before
landing in Canada during Thanksgiving 1997. On their arrival, they contacted the
immigration office who declared their refugee status. The immigration office released
6
them to witness A’s aunt. There is no additional evidence regarding the aunt of witness
A.
Witness A, witness B, and their mother, received their permanent resident status
cards in Canada. Witness A found work in the retail business, and also enrolled in some
fine arts classes. Witness A’s mother, who is still a permanent resident of Canada (Tab
J), landed employment as an administrative secretary in a computer office. (Tr. 96) 
When witness A, witness B, and their mother arrived in Canada at her aunt’s
house in 1997, Applicant coincidentally happened to be there because it was
Thanksgiving. Over the next few years, Applicant visited witness A and her family more
frequently, especially after he moved to an upper northwest location in the U.S. in 1999.
Applicant and witness A began dating and were married in Canada in August 2001. 
About five years passed before witness A moved to the U.S. because of the
circumstances of September 11, 2001. She relented after much persuasion on his part
to persuade her to come to U.S. She changed her mind after he was accepted for the
job in the local area in June 2004.
Witness A received her U.S. green card in 2006 (Tab H), and plans to apply for
her U.S. citizenship in about six months. She has lived with Applicant since
approximately October 2006. (GE 3) Applicant’s mother came to live with Applicant in
June 2007, and Witness B came to live with Applicant in October 2007. Witness A has
no desire to return to Iran. She has no family members left in the country. (Tr. 108)
Witness A enjoys the U.S. She testified:
I love every moment of it. I - - first of all, I live with my husband finally,
which is like incredible. And the reactions that people have to the fact that
I was born in Iran and there is nobody - - everybody think that, you know,
people are going to react to you like really differently. They are going to
treat you as enemy, but I found it - - I found that people are very well-
educated.
They know that if some crazy person in some distant land trying to do
harm to other people, it has nothing to do with me. I love this country. I
came here to change my life. I came here to have a better life. They don’t
judge me by that perception. They judge me by who I am, which is
amazing, which is amazing. (Tr. 104-105)
Witness A believes Applicant is very honest. She also considers him to be
endowed with strong convictions. She testified:
If he believes in something that is right, nothing can change his mind.
Nothing. I mean, he had been arrested for to flee Iran a few times. And
every time they tried to get information from him to, you know make him
say who was smuggling - - you know, what was the plan and everything.
 W itness B has not returned to Iran since his escape from the country in 1997. (Tr. 138)7
 Applicant’s counsel proffered that witness B would testify to the same facts as witness A.. Department8
Counsel had no objection to abbreviating witness B’s testimony. (Tr. 124)
 Just as his sister had done, witness B had to obtain his permanent alien status in Canada before qualifying9
to receive his U.S. green card.
 The favorable character statement was signed by eight people in Applicant’s chain of command, including10
the superintendent of the Technology Division at NRL. 
7
He never said a word about any of that, because he didn’t believe that’s
the right thing to do. And I personally really admire that. (Tr. 106,107)
Witness B, 38 years old, was born in Iran, and is still a citizen of the country. He
has been Applicant’s best friend since childhood. He is aware of Applicant’s
unsuccessful attempts to leave Iran in the 1980s. In a conversation Applicant had with
witness B, an aunt Applicant no longer has any contact with, alerted Iranian security
officials of Applicant’s plans to escape in December 1987. Applicant has not seen or
talked with that aunt since his arrest in 1987, according to witness B. (Tr. 137-139)
As witness A indicated earlier in her testimony, she, witness B, and their mother
were successfully smuggled out of Iran in 1997,  leaving their possessions behind.7 8
Applicant’s wife (witness A), witness B, and their mother lived in Canada from 1997 to
2007, with witness B employed as a computer store manager, and a budding
photographer in his spare time. Witness B and his wife, who he married in 2004, came
to live with Applicant in October 2007. No additional information was presented
regarding witness B’s wife. Their mother continues to live in Canada. Witness B has
been a permanent U.S. resident since October 2007 (AE I),  and intends to become a9
U.S. citizen. Witness B testified that he did not know of any contact Applicant may have
had with any family members or friends in Iran. (Tr. 141-143) 
Character Evidence
The library director at the NRL testified he supervises the contract that Applicant
works on. Through daily interaction, the director has found Applicant a reliable and
trustworthy person. (AE M)  Other positive attributes the director has found in10
Applicant’s performance are his habit for dependably gauging how long it will take to get
a project completed, and then completing the job in a timely fashion. (Tr. 48) When
Applicant began working at the NRL site, he spoke to the director about his
unsuccessful escapes from Iran, and his overall dislike for the Iranian government. (Tr.
49) The director was present when Applicant shredded his Iranian passport in October
2006. (AE B)
Applicant’s immediate supervisor has worked with Applicant since 2004. He
believes Applicant is a diligent and trustworthy employee. Applicant told the supervisor
about the terrible conditions in Iran, and his imprisonment for trying to leave the country.
 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006 Iran, U.S. Department of State, bureau of Democracy,11
Human Rights and Labor, dated March 6, 2007.
 Travel Warning: Iran, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, dated January 3, 2008.12
 Background Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, dated June 2007.13
 Country Reports on Terrorism2006, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism overview, U.S. Department14
of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, dated April 30, 2007; Making America Safer by
Defeating Extremists in the Middle east, State by President of the United States, released by the Office of the
W hite House Press Secretary, August 28, 2007; Annual threat Assessment for the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence, Director of National Intelligence, February 5, 2008.
8
(Tr. 70) The supervisor witnessed Applicant shred his Iranian passport in October 2006.
(AE B) Though he could not remember whether he saw Applicant sign AE C
(renunciation of citizenship), the supervisor recalled Applicant’s explanation that, since
Iran does not allow renunciation of citizenship, Applicant wanted to do what he could to
show he did not want to be a citizen of Iran. (Tr. 73)
Administrative Notice
Since the Muslim clergy came to power in the early 1980s, the Islamic Republic
of Iran has fostered a poor human rights record through repression of its people  as11
well as through mistreatment of U.S.-Iranian dual citizens.  The Iranian government12
has pursued weapons of mass destruction  and supported terrorist activities throughout13
the Middle East.  Applicant credibly testified that he knows and abhors Iran’s ugly14
human rights practices inside the country, and the country’s promotion of terrorism
abroad.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
9
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Foreign Influence (FI)
The security issues connected to foreign influence are familial ties, contacts,
and/or proprietary/financial interests that could be used to generate a heightened risk of
forcing an applicant into a position of having to choose between the foreign entity and
the U.S. 
Analysis
“Foreign contacts and interests result in security concerns where those contacts
and interests create divided loyalties, or may be manipulated or induced by a foreign
entity that is harmful to U.S., or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
entity. Decisions under this guideline should include the foreign country where the
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to whether the foreign
government targets U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated
with the risk of terrorism.” 
The government has established a preliminary basis for denying Applicant’s
security clearance application. His spouse, his mother, his half brothers, his mother-in-
law, and his brother-in-law are citizens of Iran. His family’s Iranian citizenship, when
considered in light of Iranian’s authoritarian government, characterized by poor human
rights and terrorist practices, could result in the compromise of classified information
because it makes Applicant potentially vulnerable to coercion and pressure. Foreign
Influence (FI) disqualifying condition (DC) 7.a. (contact with a foreign family member,
 W hile the Appeal Board has held that the security concerns arising from the presence of Applicant’s family15
members in Iran is not mitigated by possibility of a swift and safe departure from Iran, I still recognize that
Applicant is doing what he can to comply with the immigration laws so that his brother can eventually emigrate
to the U.S. See, ISCR Case No. 01-20908 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2003) 
10
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) applies. Applicant’s two
half-brothers are still resident citizens of Iran. However, while still a citizen of Iran,
Applicant’s spouse has had her U.S. permanent resident card since October 2006, and
anticipates becoming a U.S. citizen in about six months. She has been living with
Applicant since October 2006. She has no relatives she maintains contacts within Iran,
and has no intention of returning to the country.
Applicant’s mother is still a citizen of Iran, but has permanently lived with
Applicant since June 2007. She too has her U.S. permanent resident card and
anticipates citizenship in the near future. Applicant’s father has been living in the central
part of the U.S. since 1979, and has been a U.S. citizen since 1984. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Iran, but has been a permanent resident
of Canada since the late 1990s. Applicant’s brother-in-law has been a resident citizen
since October 2007. He has no plans to return to Iran, and intends to become a U.S.
citizen. 
FI DC 7.b. (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information) applies. The fact that Applicants family
members, except for his father, are still citizens of Iran constitutes a potential for conflict
that shifts the burden to Applicant to show why he will resolve the conflict in favor of the
U.S. As noted in the preceding paragraph, the geographical location and official
residency status of his family members, except for his two half-brothers, has changed.
In addition, his mother, his spouse, and his brother-in-law have their green cards, and
intend to apply for U.S. citizenship. 
FI DC 7.d. (sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion) also applies based on fact that Applicant’s spouse
has a U.S. permanent resident card she received in October 2006, and has been living
with Applicant for over a year. Applicant’s mother has her U.S. permanent resident card
she received in September 2003, and has lived with Applicant twice a year until she
moved in permanently in July 2007. While Applicant’s half-brothers still reside in and are
citizens of Iran, Applicant has sponsored the younger half-brother for eventual
immigration to the U.S.  Applicant’s mother-in-law is still a citizen of Iran, but she is a15
permanent resident of Canada, and has lived there since the late 1990s. Applicant’s
brother-in-law received his U.S. permanent residency card in October 2007, and has
11
lived with Applicant since that date. Though Applicant’s family members remain targets
and conduits for influence due to their Iranian citizenship, I do not find that, considering
the evidence as a whole, they pose the same heightened risk of influence under FI DC
7.d. as they did before the changes of residence. 
Since Applicant’s family members are citizens of Iran, whose government has a
hostile relationship with the government of the U.S. Applicant bears a heavy burden of
showing his family members do not pose a security risk. ISCR Case No. 01-26983
(October 16, 2002) 
Three of the six mitigating conditions (MC) under the FI guideline may apply to
the facts and circumstances of this case: 
FC MC 8.a. (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the position or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.); 
FI MC 8.b. (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is minimal, or the individual has such deep and long lasting
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest);
 FI MC 8.c. (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for
foreign influence or exploitation).
Even though Applicant’s spouse, mother, mother-in-law, and brother-in law are
still citizens of Iran, they are either official residents of Canada or the U.S., and have
rights and legal protections consistent with their resident status in both countries. They
do not intend to return to Iran, but they do intend to become U.S. citizens. Applicant’s
wife (witness A) is an assistant manager in retail in the U.S. She had the same
employment while in Canada for about ten years. Witness A’s mother, who was
detained for three days in Iran in the 1990s, has been a secretary in Canada for a long
time. The record is silent on the avocation of Applicant’s mother. Applicant’s brother-in-
law was a store manager and photographer in Canada, and is pursuing photography in
the U.S. None of the listed family members were employees or agents of the Iranian
government. Leaving Iran in 1997 because of the threats and detention, and having
achieved permanent residency status first in Canada and eventually in the U.S., it is my
commonsense view that the chances of pressure being exerted on and through his
immediate family members to Applicant in the future is extremely low. The mitigating
evidence presented under FI MC 8.a. resolves SOR 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.e. in
Applicant’s favor. 
 ISCR Case No. 02-26826 (November 12, 2003). 16
12
The chances of Applicant succumbing to foreign exploitation/pressure are
reduced even more by his convincing testimony of his strong feelings against the
Iranian government, and the steps he would take to resist and report attempts to
influence him. Though a person’s intentions about a future event may not be entitled to
much weight,  Applicant’s teenage history of detention, intimidation, and torture at the16
hands of Iranian security officials in the 1980s for trying to escape the country
persuades me to conclude he will fulfill out his stated intention regarding the protection
of classified information. Applicant’s past conduct in not disclosing information to the
Iranian authorities (about details of the smuggling operation and/or involvement of his
mother) justifies complete confidence he will employ the same resistance efforts to
successfully repel any coercive or non-coercive effort at foreign influence in the future.
Having weighed the entire record, I believe Applicant’s sense of loyalty to the U.S. and
his job at NRL outweighs his relationships with his half-brothers, resident citizens of
Iran. The character witness testimony, and the fact-based testimony of witness A and B
indicate he will resolve any conflict in favor of the interests of the U.S., and consistent
with FI MC 8.b. SOR 1.c. is found in Applicant’s favor. 
FI MC 8.c. is inapplicable to this case. Even though Applicant’s contacts with his
half brothers are less than four times a year, those contacts added to his mother’s
contacts (although she has no plans to return to Iran) cannot be considered casual and
infrequent. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
My finding for Applicant under the FI guideline must still be evaluated in the
context of nine variables known as the whole person concept. In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should consider the
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. Applicant was 22 years old when he arrived
in the U.S. in 1997, and under a permanent resident status in this country. He had two
degrees from an Iranian university, and he pursued additional computer training just
after he emigrated to the U.S. He has held several computer jobs in the U.S. before
landing the NRL position in June 2004. He received his U.S. citizenship in 1997. 
Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in 2002, but his only trip back to Iran was
in 2002 when he attended his half-brother’s wedding. Even though he knew he could
not relinquish his citizenship in 2006, he tried to turn in his passport at the Iranian
Interest Section of Pakistani Embassy. Just before he had his Iranian passport
13
shredded in October 2006, he signed a statement (which was witnessed)
communicating his intention to relinquish his Iranian citizenship.
It is my predictive decision that given (1) Applicant’s personal experiences with
detention, intimidation and beatings as a teenager, (2) his disapproval of the dreadful
practices of the Iranian government inside and outside the country, and (3) his
comprehension of the government’s increased security concerns to foil any potential
avenues for foreign influence, I am confidant Applicant will successfully resist and report
foreign influence in the future. The praiseworthy character testimony strengthens my
confidence that Applicant will stand by his stated intentions. Considering the evidence in
the context of the whole person model, Applicant has met his heavy burden of mitigating
the security concerns arising from the residency and citizenship of his family members.
His trip to Iran in 2002 was prompted by a desire to see his older half-brother’s wedding.
Applicant’s trip for his family member’s wedding in Iran has no independent security
significance under the FI guideline. See, ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. Sept. 21,
2005) SOR 1.f. is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Foreign Influence, Guideline B): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
