                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06896 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s father was a Tunisian citizen. Applicant was born in the U.S. and from 
age 7 to 19 lived in Tunisia. Since 1991, he has lived in the United States. Applicant’s 
father, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Tunisia. His mother 
also resides in Tunisia. Applicant maintains a Tunisian passport, which he chooses not 
to surrender.  
 
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and evidence, I 
conclude Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign influence. However, Applicant maintains his Tunisian passport and 
has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concern under Guideline C, 
foreign preference. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
 1
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 15, 2007, detailing security 
concerns under Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence.  
  
 On August 23, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On December 14, 2007, I was assigned the case. On 
March 12, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on 
March 26, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was kept open 
to allow Applicant to submit additional matters which were received on March 31, 2008. 
Department Counsel did not object to the material and it was admitted into evidence as 
Exs. A through E. On April 11, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Tunisia. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx.) I─III. 
More recent versions of the same documents were admitted as HEx. IV-VI. A travel 
alert (HEx. VII) was also submitted for administrative notice. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all the allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant is a 35-year-old software engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 1996, and is seeking to maintain a secret security clearance, which he has 
had for 11 years. Applicant has excellent technical and problem solving skills. He 
provided a quality product on each project assigned. His job performance has been 
excellent. (Ex. B) 
 
 In 1972, Applicant was born in Kansas. His mother was born and raised in the 
U.S. She met Applicant’s father when he was a student. They married and stayed in the 
U.S. until Applicant was 7 years old. Applicant’s brother was born during this time. This 
brother is an electrician who lives in the same city as Applicant. (Tr. 61) From age 7 to 
19, Applicant lived in Tunisia, where another brother was born. This brother is a 
salesman who also lives in the same city as Applicant. (Tr. 62) When Applicant lived in 
Tunisia, he returned to the U.S. every other year, spending a month to six weeks visiting 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 2
his grandparents during the summer. (Tr. 27) His mother’s father was an accountant 
and his mother’s mother did not work outside the home. (Tr. 66) 
 
 Applicant’s father worked in human resources for an oil company, taught English 
at a university, and was involved in agriculture. (Tr. 63) He is now retired and raises 
bees. (Tr. 63) Applicant does not know where his father is. (Tr. 50) Since his parents 
divorced in 2003, Applicant has maintained no contact with his father. (Tr. 51) His 
mother, who has lived in Tunisia more than 30 years, chose to remain in Tunisia 
following the divorce. (Tr. 23) She has mentioned returning to the U.S. permanently. (Tr. 
50) Applicant’s mother visited him from Christmas time until February. (Tr. 50) 
Applicant’s two brothers, grandmother, uncles and everyone on his mother’s side of the 
family live in the same state he does. (Tr. 35)  
 
At age 19, Applicant returned to the U.S. to attend school. He visited Tunisia 
during the summers or during Christmas breaks at school. (Tr. 40) He traveled to 
Tunisia during July and August 1998, December 1999 and January 2000, July and 
August 2001, December2001 and January 2002, and July and August 2004.  
 
 Applicant has a Tunisian passport issued in October 2003, which will expire in 
October 2008. He last used this passport on his 2004 trip to Tunisia. He used his U.S. 
passport for travel to Tunisia. (Tr. 38) He uses his U.S. passport for all travel except 
when visiting Tunisia. (Tr. 41) Upon leaving Tunisia he will show both his U.S. and 
Tunisian passports. (Tr. 41) In June 2007, when Applicant completed written 
interrogatories (Ex. 2), he stated he had no intention of giving up his Tunisian passport. 
He maintains his Tunisian passport for ease of travel when visiting Tunisia. Applicant 
plans on visiting his relatives in Tunisia every three years. (Tr. 21)  
 
In May 1996, Applicant obtained his bachelors degree in electrical engineering 
from a U.S. state university. In December 2001, Applicant married a woman born in 
Tunisia who became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2006. They have two children, 
ages one and five, both born in the U.S. His wife is an accountant. They own a home 
worth approximately $170,000 on which is owed $117,000. (Ex. 3, Ex. C, Ex. D)  
 
Applicant has approximately $11,500 in a credit union saving account, $7,500 in 
his checking account, and $9,000 in share certificates. (Ex. E) He has $100,000 in his 
company 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 30) Applicant and his wife have $9,000 in a 
savings account in Tunisia. (Tr. 31) It is a special account for housing purchases. (Tr. 
32) He no longer adds to that account because he has reached the maximum amount 
allowable for that account.  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a Tunisian citizen who is a retired civil engineer. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a Tunisian citizen who is retired from the banking industry. 
(Ex. 3) Applicant talks with them weekly. Applicant has two brothers-in-law, one of 
whom is a computer engineer. The other is a college student. (Tr. 66) One brother-in-
law lives in Canada and the other is about to move there. (Tr. 47) Within the last six 
months, his parents-in-law stayed with Applicant and his family for three months before 
 3
visiting Canada. Upon their return from Canada, they stayed with Applicant and his 
family for another four months, leaving two weeks before the hearing. (Tr. 47)  
 
 Applicant has never voted in a foreign election. (Tr. 22, 42) He owns no foreign 
property. (Tr.29) Applicant has no loyalty to the Tunisian government (Tr. 58)  
  
Tunisia 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Tunisia is a republic with a 
strong presidential system dominated by a single political party. There are eight legal 
opposition parties. Progress toward full democracy has been slow. The current 
president has stood unopposed for re-election several times. In 1974 he was made 
“President for Life” by a constitutional amendment. (HExs. II and V) Tunisia has a long-
time policy of seeking good relations with the West, including the Unites States, while 
playing an active role in Arab and African regional bodies. (HExs. II and V)  
 
The Department of States warns Tunisia has open borders with Libya and 
Algeria. During late 2002 and early 2003, a number of tourists were kidnapped in the 
Sahara desert. In April 2002, tourists were also attacked by terrorists and in January 
2007, another terrorist attack on tourists was disrupted. (HExs. I and IV) In light of the 
reported kidnappings of two western tourists in the Tunisian-Algerian southern desert 
region, the Department of State advises U.S. citizens to exercise extreme caution if 
traveling in this area. (HEx. VII) 
 
The Tunisian government continues to commit serious human rights abuses 
which include infringement on citizens’ privacy rights, severe restriction on freedom of 
speech and the press, and restriction on the freedom of assembly and association. 
(HExs. III and VI) There are frequent reports of widespread torture and abuse of 
prisoners, especially political prisoners. Tunisian security forces arbitrarily arrest and 
detain individuals. (HExs. III and VI) 
 
American citizens of Tunisian origin are expected to enter and exit Tunisia on 
their Tunisian passports. If a Tunisian-American enters on a U.S. passport, they will still 
have to present a Tunisian passport to exit the country. (HExs. I and IV)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
 4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Foreign preference is a security concern because, when an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, he 
or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States. AG & 9. Additionally, the possession or use of a foreign 
passport is a condition that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. AG 
& 10(a) (1) Applicant has a Tunisian passport, which he used when visiting Tunisia. He 
has no intention of giving up his Tunisian passport. (Ex. 2) I find AG 10(a) (1) applies.  
 
 5
 6
Applicant used his Tunisian passport in compliance with requirements stated in 
the Consular Information Sheet: Tunisia, U.S. Department of State Bureau of Consular 
Affairs, dated October 3, 2007 and February 5, 2008. (HExs. I and IV) By Tunisian law, 
American citizens of Tunisian origin are expected to enter and exit Tunisia on their 
Tunisian passports. If a Tunisian-American enters on a U.S. passport, they will still have 
to present a Tunisian passport to exit the country. AG & 11(d) states it may be a 
mitigating condition if “use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority.” Compliance with advisements set forth in the Consular Information Sheet: 
Tunisia is not equivalent to approval by a cognizant security authority. AG & 11(d) does 
not apply nor, as discussed below, do any of the other mitigating conditions under this 
guideline. 
  
AG & 11(e) sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns if the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated. Surrendering his passport to his company’s security officer and 
obtain it when he intends to travel to Tunisia might meet the requirements set forth in 
AG & 11(d). The passport would have been surrendered to a “cognizant security 
authority,” and would be beyond Applicant’s control to the same extent as if one of the 
named events had occurred.  
 
The government has a number of concerns when an individual possesses a 
foreign passport. First, the government’s knowledge of that individual’s travel once they 
leave the U.S. would be severely limited. Second, the government would have no way 
of preventing that individual from leaving the country. In an appropriate case, an 
individual with a U.S. passport could have that passport cancelled or revoked to prevent 
flight from the U.S. When a person possesses a foreign passport, the government’s 
ability to prevent flight from the U.S. is greatly reduced.  
 
If the Tunisian passport was under the control of the company’s security officer 
and Applicant had to retrieve it before traveling to Tunisia, there would be a greater 
degree of control over Applicant’s travel. It is not certain that it would result in mitigating 
the security concern, but would be considered in making the determination as to 
whether a security concern existed. The entire matter is speculative because Applicant 
maintains control of his Tunisian passport and has not surrendered it to his company’s 
security officer or other cognizant security authority.  
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. AG & 6 
 
 
 
 
7
 
The terrorists in Tunisia are not government supported terrorists. Tunisia is not 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. Applicant does not have 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests. The $9,000 Tunisian account Applicant 
and his wife have is deminimus when compared to Applicant’s U.S. assets. 
 
I have considered the foreign influence disqualifying conditions, which are listed 
under AG & 7. I find AG & 7(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and AG & 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, 
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” apply. 
 
Applicant’s father, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Tunisia and are all retired. His mother is a dual U.S. and Tunisian citizen living in 
Tunisia. Normally, an individual’s relationship with their father is a close relationship. 
However, in this case, Applicant is not close to his father. Since his parent’s 2003 
divorce, Applicant has had no contact with his father and is unsure of his father’s 
location. Applicant talks to his in-laws weekly, but is not overly close to them.  
 
Applicant’s mother was born and raised in the U.S. She married a Tunisian, 
moved there, and has lived there more than 30 years. Her parents and siblings reside in 
the same state Applicant does. Applicant’s two brothers also live in the U.S. in the same 
city where Applicant lives.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.,” and AG ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either 
because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” apply to Applicant’s parents and in-laws.  
 
Applicant was born in the U.S. and lived here until age seven. From age 7 until 
19 he lived in Tunisia, but returned to the U.S. every two or three years to visit his 
mother’s relatives. At age 19, he returned to the U.S. to attend school and has 
remained. His wife was born in Tunisia but is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Both of his 
children were born in the U.S. Applicant owns a home in the U.S. Because of these 
things there is little likelihood Applicant has a conflict of interest. If there was a conflict 
his longstanding loyalty to the U.S. makes it likely the conflict would be resolved it in 
favor of the U.S.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I also considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in the U.S., 
left the country at age seven, and returned in 1991, at age 19 to attend college, and has 
remained since. His wife, children, brothers, and his mother’s family all reside in the 
U.S. He is an established, highly regarded engineer, with considerable U.S. ties and 
assets.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Tunisia and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country. None of his 
relatives are connected to any foreign government. Applicant was sincere, open, and 
honest at the hearing. It is unlikely his parents or in-laws will be subjected to coercion or 
duress from terrorist groups or the Tunisian government. His relatives art not a security 
concern.  
 
However, Applicant maintains his Tunisian passport so he can travel to Tunisia. 
This is a security concern that has not been mitigated. Even with Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties to the U.S., including his uncompromising 
commitment to his country, wife, and children, the possession of the foreign passport 
remains of security concern.  
 
Due to possession of the foreign passport, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns, but not the foreign preference concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.c:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.f:  For Applicant 
   
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
