 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-07634 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on January 19, 
2007. On November 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) 
and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR, answered it in an undated 
document, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1 DOHA received 
the request on February 1, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
February 28, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on March 7, 2008. DOHA issued 
                                                          
1 The record does not indicate whether Applicant’s answer to the SOR was sworn.  The affidavit attached to his 
answer in the case file pertains to Government Exhibit (GX 18), an interview of Applicant by a security investigator. 
 
2 
 
 
a notice of hearing on March 24, 2008, amended on March 27, 2008, scheduling the 
hearing for April 23, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 18 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until May 7, 
2008, to enable him to submit additional matters. He telephonically requested an 
extension of time, which I granted. He timely submitted AX E, and it was admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX E is attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 1, 
2008. The record closed on May 8, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 At the hearing, I directed Department Counsel to submit a memorandum of law 
addressing the repeal of the “Smith Amendment,” 10 U.S.C. § 936 in the National 
Defense Authorization Act for the Fiscal Year 2008, Public Law 110-181, codified in 50 
U.S.C. §435c.  Department Counsel submitted a memorandum of law and a motion to 
amend the SOR ¶ 1.i by replacing “10 U.S.C. § 936” with “50 U.S.C. § 435c.” The 
memorandum of law and motion to amend are attached to the record as HX II. 
 
 After due consideration, I have denied the motion to amend, because to do so 
would cause the SOR to allege a provision of the U.S. Code that had not yet been 
enacted when the SOR was issued.  The impact of the repeal of 10 U.S.C. § 936 and its 
replacement by 50 U.S.C. § 435c is discussed below in my analysis of Guideline H. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 
2.g, 2.h, and 2.j. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old senior electrical designer employed by a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer for about 39 years, and he has held 
a security clearance since 1972 (Tr. 7-8; GX 14, 15, and 16). He is married and has 
three adult children.  He is active in community sports activities, having coached and 
managed Little League teams for 11 years and Pee Wee football for three years (Tr. 
64). 
 
 Applicant was arrested for larceny in January 1966, and paid a $15 fine (GX 9; 
AX B). He was arrested in November 1969 for breaking and entering with violence. He 
pleaded guilty to breach of the peace. He was fined and placed on probation for one 
year (GX 10; GX 13; AX B). Based on a probation officer’s report and his disclosure on 
a security application, the SOR alleges he was under the influence of LSD at the time of 
his arrest in November 1969 (GX 2 at 6; GX 13 at 4). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In a sworn statement to a security investigator in May 1971, Applicant admitted 
using marijuana “on numerous occasions” from January 1967 to January 1971.  He also 
admitted experimenting with LSD and taking “speed” to stay awake during 1968-69 (GX 
10). A report of investigation from May 2007 reflects that Applicant admitted using 
marijuana “throughout the 1990s” (GX 18 at 3), but he denied making that statement 
when asked in DOHA interrogatories to review the accuracy of the report (GX 17 at 3).  
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 1973, for breach of peace and resisting arrest. 
He pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct and was fined $25 (GX 7; GX 12; AX A; AX B). 
He was arrested in September 1975 for breach of peace and was fined $35 (GX 9; GX 
11; AX B). He was arrested in July 1976 and charged with assault in the 3rd degree, but 
the charges were disposed of by nolle prosequi (GX 7). The reason for the decision not 
to prosecute is not reflected in the record. 
 
 Applicant was seriously injured on the job in February 1978. He was working on 
a submarine when a large light fixture fell on his head and neck, causing severe neck 
injuries. In 1981, he was diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome caused by the injury, 
and underwent a rib resection to remedy it. He still suffers from pain in his neck and 
lower back. His pain level is a 6 on a scale of 10. He has been diagnosed as having 
degenerative disc disease, with significant loss of range of motion. He also suffers from 
numbness and tingling in his arms. His doctor reports that he has about a 40% 
improvement in pain relief, but it lasts only for the duration of the anesthetic (AX E).  
 
 Applicant crushed his right thumb in a wood splitter in 1993. About half the thumb 
was amputated, followed by 13 surgical procedures to reconstruct it. He used marijuana 
for about a year and a half, until some time in 1995, because his prescribed medications 
did not control the pain (Tr. 76; AX E at 9). 
 
 Applicant was stopped by customs officials in January 1995 and cited for having 
illegal contraband and was fined (GX 2 at 6). In response to DOHA interrogatories in 
October 2007, he disclosed that the contraband was a small quantity of marijuana (GX 
17 at 5), and he admitted it at the hearing (Tr. 78-80).  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in March 2003. He 
answered “no” question 23, asking whether he had every illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance (GX 2 at 7). He testified he did not 
answer “yes” because he believed he would cost him his clearance (Tr. 82). 
 
 Applicant was injured in an automobile accident in September 2005.  He was 
rear-ended by an armored car and suffered further neck injuries. He used marijuana to 
relieve the pain about 20 times between the car accident and March 2008 (Tr. 73-75). 
   
 Applicant was arrested in September 2006 for possession of marijuana, 
interfering with an officer, resisting an officer, and tampering with evidence. In an 
interview with a security investigator in May 2007, Applicant stated he was waiting in his 
car for a friend to join him when he was approached by a policeman and asked to step 
 
4 
 
 
out of his car. Applicant had a marijuana cigarette in his pocket, which he placed in his 
mouth and attempted to swallow it. When the police held him down and were choking 
him in their attempts to get the marijuana out of his mouth, he spit it out. Applicant hired 
a lawyer, and after several postponements of his case, the charges were disposed of by 
nolle prosequi (Tr. 71-72; GX 18 at1-2; AX D at 2). The reason for the decision not to 
prosecute is not reflected in the record. 
 
 Applicant completed another security clearance application in January 2007. As 
he did on his previous application, he falsely answered “no” to the question about using 
controlled substances while holding a clearance (Tr. 86-87; GX 1 at 8). 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in May 2007. According to 
the investigator’s report, Applicant admitted using marijuana from about age 15, 
continuing “throughout the 1990s,” and using cocaine and “speed during high school 
“and the years after that.” According to the investigator, Applicant said he would 
continue to use marijuana as a pain reliever if his doctor cannot help him, and said he 
did not care if his security clearance is revoked because of his drug use (GX 18 at 3).  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated the security investigator 
“had an attitude” toward him and conducted the interview in a snack bar with workers 
walking in and out instead of more private facilities (GX 17 at 3). On cross-examination, 
Applicant asked the investigator what she did before becoming an investigator, and she 
responded that she was in college and obtained a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice.  
He looked at her incredulously and asked, “That’s the extent of it?” He started to ask, 
“So you really ain’t got no . . .” but was interrupted by Department Counsel’s objection 
and terminated his cross-examination (Tr. 56). Applicant’s disdain for the investigator 
was obvious. 
 
Applicant testified he was upset with the investigator for questioning him in a 
room open to other people instead of a more private and appropriate environment. He 
felt he was not treated with respect (Tr. 63). He testified that what he actually told the 
investigator was, “[A]fter I retire, if I want to smoke marijuana, I can smoke marijuana 
because it’s not going to affect my clearance.” Tr. 62.)  
 
Applicant also testified:  
 
I know I told her that yes, I don’t care – but I do care about my clearance. 
But it’s just the way she came across to me, she just upset me. I was in a 
bad mood that day. I was in a lot of pain and I probably said things that I – 
some things I probably should not have said, but I’m repeating myself, but 
I did. I was aggravated because I felt that she was showing no respect for 
me as a person, putting me in a room right next to the rotating door where 
the little partition [is] up and then the candy machines in there. (Tr. 65.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified he last used marijuana about a month before 
the hearing, in order to relieve his pain (Tr. 72). Even after multiple treatments for his 
 
5 
 
 
neck injury, he still suffers a lot of pain (Tr. 88-89). In his closing statement, he 
expressed his frustration about the conflict between his marijuana use and his 
clearance as follows:  
 
I’m not a bad person. I do things that aren’t legal in the eyes of the law, 
but at one time marijuana was legal in this country, 1936, that’s when it 
became illegal when you made alcohol legal which is worse for you than 
any marijuana could ever be, so you guys change the rules as you feel. I 
mean if you want to take my clearance, take it. I’ll just retire. . . . People 
don’t understand what pain does to people, but you don’t know what it’s 
like until you get into that situation where you’ve been in pain.  
 
(Tr. 107-08.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used cocaine and “speed” in high school and 
thereafter (¶ 1.g); used marijuana from 1967 through the 1990s (¶ 1.b) and from June 
2006 until “at least” January 19, 2007 (¶ 1.a); and used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance (¶ 1.d). It also alleges he was arresting in 1969 for breaking and 
entering with violence and that he was under the influence of LSD at the time of the 
arrest (¶ 1.h); he was cited by customs official in 1995 for having marijuana in his 
possession (¶ 1.f); and he was arrested for possession of marijuana in September 2006 
(¶ 1.c). It further alleges he told a security investigator in May 2007 he intended to 
continue using marijuana even if it affected his security clearance (¶ 1.e). Finally, it 
alleges he is disqualified from having his clearance renewed under 10 U.S.C. § 986. 
  
The security concern relating to Guideline H is set out in AG & 24 as follows: : 
AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.@ “Drugs” include ADrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).  
AG ¶ 24(a)(1). “Drug abuse” is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
At the hearing, Applicant denied telling the security investigator he intended to 
continue using marijuana even if it affected his security clearance. Five months before 
the interview, he falsified his SF 86 because he was concerned about protecting his 
clearance. If he cared about keeping his clearance in January 2007, it’s difficult to 
believe he no longer cared about it in May 2007. Based on his displeasure with being 
interviewed in a quasi-public place and his obvious disdain for the investigator, he may 
well have made the statement as an expression of frustration or anger rather than a lack 
of concern about his clearance. He made a similar expression of frustration during the 
hearing, i.e., “If you want to take my clearance, take it.” I conclude that he probably said 
something similar to what is reflected in the investigator’s report, and that he intended to 
continue using marijuana to relieve his severe plain, but I do not believe he had stopped 
caring about keeping his clearance. 
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse,@ Aillegal 
drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, @ and “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g). The evidence in this case 
establishes these three disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005). Applicant admitted his marijuana use at the hearing, and he did not produce 
evidence establishing any of the enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline. 
 
Under 10 U.S.C. § 986, in effect at the time the SOR was issued, the Department 
of Defense was prohibited from granting or renewing a clearance for any person who 
was “an unlawful user of, or [was] addicted to, a controlled substance.” National 
Defense Authorization Act for the Fiscal Year 2008, Public Law 110-181, codified in 50 
U.S.C. § 435c, repealed 10 U.S.C. § 986 and replaced it with the following: “After 
January 1, 2008, the head of a Federal agency may not grant or renew a security 
clearance for a covered person who is an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an 
addict” as defined by federal law. Neither the President nor the Department of Defense 
has issued any guidance for implementing this change in the law, including any 
instructions regarding the retroactive effect of this change. 
 
Both 10 U.S.C. § 986(c)(2) and its replacement in 50 U.S.C. § 435c(b) use the 
present tense, making them applicable only if the person “is” an unlawful user or “is” an 
addict. See ISCR Case No. 03-25009 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2005). Based on the evidence, 
I conclude Applicant is disqualified as an unlawful user of marijuana. He has used it for 
most of his adult life, and used it regularly to control plain since his injuries in 1978, 
1993, and 2005. He intentionally did not disclose his marijuana use while holding a 
clearance because he knew it would cost him his clearance. He told a security 
investigator he will continue to use it to control his pain; he used it to control pain a 
 
8 
 
 
month before the hearing; and he continues to be in pain, making it likely he will 
continue to use it. I am satisfied Applicant is a present user of marijuana within the 
meaning of 10 U.S. § 986 and 50 U.S.C. § 435c. I need not decide which statutory 
disqualification applies to Applicant, because he is disqualified from having his 
clearance renewed under either. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges the drug-related criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. It also alleges an arrest and conviction for larceny in 1966 (¶ 
2.j); an arrest for breach of peace and resisting arrest and a conviction of disorderly 
conduct in 1973 (¶ 2.i); an arrest and conviction for breach of the peace in 1975 (¶ 2.h); 
and an arrest for assault in the 3rd degree in 1976 (¶ 2.g). 
 
The security concern under Guideline J is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: The 
concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” Conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single serious crime or multiple 
lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
(c). Applicant’s arrests and convictions raise these two disqualifying conditions. 
 
It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant admitted falsifying his security 
clearance applications on two occasions. His falsifications were not alleged in the SOR, 
and thus may not be the basis for denying a clearance.  
 
 However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered: A(a) to assess an 
applicant=s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant=s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3.@ ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations 
omitted). Additionally, the Appeal Board has determined that even though crucial 
security concerns are not alleged in the SOR, the Judge may consider those security 
concerns when they are relevant and factually related to a disqualifying condition that 
was alleged in the SOR.  ISCR 05-01820 at 3 n.4 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2006) (citing ISCR 
Case No. 01-18860 at 8 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2003) and ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 4 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003)). I have considered Applicant’s falsifications for the limited 
 
9 
 
 
purposes of determining whether he is a present user of marijuana, whether he has 
been successfully rehabilitated, and as part of my whole person analysis. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The allegations 
cover a span from Applicant’s high school days to the present. His most recent arrest 
was in September 2005, he falsified his security clearance application in January 2007, 
and he used marijuana a month before the hearing. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns also can be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). Applicant 
apparently has a good employment record, and he is actively involved in his community. 
However, his criminal conduct has continued until recently and his illegal marijuana use 
likely will continue. I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked for a defense contractor and held a 
clearance for many years. He lives in almost continuous pain from multiple injuries, and 
he resorts to marijuana use in an effort to control his pain. He certainly deserves 
compassion. His illegal drug use is understandable, but impermissible and inconsistent 
with holding a clearance.  
 
10 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. Even if Applicant were not statutorily disqualified from holding a 
clearance based on his current marijuana use, I would still conclude that continuing his 
clearance is not clearly consistent with the national interest, because of his criminal 
record and past drug abuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.j:    Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
