 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-07761 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations, criminal conduct, and lack of credibility. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) (GE 1) on 
October 10, 2006. On October 19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2008. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing the next day. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
March 4, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 
through 7, which were received without objection.2 DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 12, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations with 
explanations. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence, including Applicant’s demeanor, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old program analyst employed by a government contractor 
(Tr. 40). She received an Associate’s Degree in Business Management in December 
2007 (Tr. 5), and expects to complete her Bachelor’s degree in 2009 (Tr. 96). She 
married her first spouse in November 1998. They separated in 2001, and divorced in 
2003 (Tr. 38). She has two children from this marriage, ages 8 and 9 (Tr. 39). Applicant 
and her ex-husband share custody of their children and she receives no alimony or 
support. Applicant married her current spouse in May 2008 (Tr. 39). 
 
Applicant’s work history (GE 1) reflects she has been, for the most part, 
consistently employed since 1996 to the present as a program analyst and an executive 
administrator. In September 2006, she was hired by her current employer, a 
government contractor, and would like access to sensitive information to work on 
government contracts. Since 1996, she has been unemployed only during a one month 
period in 2003 (Tr. 98, GE 1). 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial problems and past 
criminal behavior. It included a review of her August 2007 response to DOHA 
interrogatories (GE 2), and the review of credit bureau reports (CBRs) from October 
2006 (GE 4), and July 2007 (GE 3). The SOR alleges 12 delinquent/charged off 
accounts totaling approximately $16,600.3 The debts are well supported by the record 
evidence. At her hearing, consistent with her answers to the SOR, Applicant confirmed 
these are her debts and they are still outstanding.  
 
2  AE 7 was submitted post-hearing. I kept the record open until April 4, 2008, to allow Applicant 
time to submit additional documentation. Department Counsel’s memorandum, stating no objections to 
me considering Applicant’s post-hearing submission is included in AE 7. 
 
3  Applicant explained, and the Government conceded, SOR ¶¶ 1. f and 1.j are the same account 
(Tr. 25-26). 
 
3 
 
 
In December 2006, a government investigator confronted Applicant about her 
delinquencies. During that interview, Applicant promised to begin resolving her 
delinquent debts by contacting creditors, paying some of her debts, and establishing 
payment plans for others. Applicant presented little evidence of any efforts taken to pay 
or otherwise resolve her debts since the day she acquired them until after she received 
her SOR in October 2007.  
 
Applicant explained she went through a rough financial period from 2001 to 
September 2006. During that period she separated from her first husband and later they 
were divorced. She was providing care and support for herself and her children. Her 
earnings were inadequate, around $32,000 a year and she relied on her credit to pay for 
day-to-day living expenses and other debts. As a result of these factors, and the higher 
cost of living, she acquired many debts which became delinquent because she did not 
have the means to pay for them. Most of those delinquent debts remain delinquent to 
the present, and are alleged in the SOR.  
 
In September 2006, Applicant was hired by her current employer and received a 
salary increase of around $18,000. Since 2006, she has been earning approximately 
$54,000 a year. Applicant claimed for the last three years she has been working hard 
repairing her credit, paying delinquent debts and making settlement agreements. 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence of payments made to any creditors, 
settlement agreements, or of any efforts to resolve her debts prior to receipt of her SOR.  
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts include credit card accounts, personal loans, unpaid 
utility services, and a medical bill. Six of the delinquent debts listed could be considered 
small debts because the total owed per debt is less than $1,000. Since October 2007, 
Applicant has made payments on some of her delinquent debts and established 
settlement agreement for a few others. Applicant admitted she never contacted any of 
the creditors prior to October 2007, because she did not have the money to pay the 
debts (Tr. 46-47, 106). 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,418), Applicant explained she paid her car insurance 
in a monthly basis. While on work related travel, she allowed a friend to use her car 
which was uninsured. He was involved in an accident and damaged a utility pole. She 
could not afford to pay for the utility pole, and the debt was referred for collection. At her 
hearing she claimed she entered into a payment agreement around October 2007, and 
that she has been making monthly payments of $100 for a total of $500 (Tr. 43-44). Her 
documentary evidence shows she paid $100 in March 2005; four payments of $75 in 
January 2007; one $50 payment in October 2007; and one payment in March 2008 
(AEs 5, 6). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,154) is an outstanding delinquent debt. It was acquired as a result 
of a broken apartment lease. While leasing the apartment, Applicant paid the rent late, 
but claimed she did not issue worthless checks to the landlord (Tr. 48). The owner filed 
a judgment against Applicant in May 2004. She never attempted to settle the debt 
because she did not have the money and they refused to settle for less than full 
 
4 
 
 
payment. She claimed she contacted the debt collector after October 2007, but they 
have not sent her any documents (Tr. 46). 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($757) and 1.d ($1,642) are collections for Applicant’s delinquent 
credit card accounts. SOR ¶ 1.c has been in collection since 1999 (Tr. 109-110). She 
claimed she made settlement agreements with both debt collectors and that she paid 
$100 on each account. She presented no evidence to support her claims (Tr. 50, 57, 
111). 
 
Applicant alleged she established a payment agreement in October 2007 with the 
debt collector for SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,239), and that she has been making payments. The 
evidence shows she has made one $50 payment (AE 5, p. 5). She presented no 
evidence of a settlement/payment agreement or additional payments. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($297) and 1.j ($340) alleged the same delinquent account. She 
claimed she has made some payments after receipt of the SOR (Tr. 27). She presented 
no evidence to corroborate her claims. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.g ($645), Applicant claimed 
she recently contacted the creditor to establish a payment plan. She presented no 
evidence to support her claim (Tr. 113). 
 
Applicant paid off SOR ¶ 1.h ($570) with payments in January and February 
2008 (AE 6). Concerning SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,115), Applicant initially testified she did not 
recognize the creditor. However, during cross-examination she remembered this was 
one of her delinquent credit card accounts (Tr. 56, 58, 114).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,109) was Applicant’s cell phone account which became 
delinquent. Because she did not have the money to pay it, she just ignored it until she 
received the SOR (Tr. 59-60). At her hearing, she claimed she paid $200 and that she 
promised to pay it in full before May 1, 2008. Applicant’s documentary evidence shows 
she paid $100 on March 3, 2008 (AE 5). She also provided the debt collector with a 
postdated check to be deposited on March 27, 2008 (AE 6).  
 
Applicant claimed she did not recognized SOR ¶ 1.l ($95). GEs 3 and 4 show 
that in 2003 Applicant issued a $70 worthless check to a medical provider and has 
failed to make it good (Tr. 61-62). SOR 1.m ($1,645) is a delinquent debt for medical 
services Applicant received. She claimed she was provided the bill for her co-payment 
two years after she received the services and stated is disputing the claim. She has not 
disputed the claim through proper channels, and has done nothing to resolve the debt 
(Tr. 63-64). 
 
In addition to the above debts, Applicant has a $17,000 student loan that will 
require payments beginning in 2009 (Tr. 96). In June 2007, Applicant agreed to a 
$78,000 judgment by default (Tr. 73-81). Apparently, while working as a bookkeeper, 
she was accused of stealing $30,000. Applicant vehemently denied any criminal 
malfeasance. She admitted, however, to causing the loss of money through her 
negligence. The judgment included $35,812 in punitive damages, attorney fees, and 
 
5 
 
 
pre-judgment interest on promissory notes signed by her (GEs 5, 6). She also owes 
$20,000 to her current husband for an equity loan she took to pay for one of her cars 
and other debts (Tr. 85). 
 
Applicant expressed numerous times her willingness and intent to pay her 
delinquent debts; however, at the present she cannot afford to do so. Her monthly 
expenses far exceed her net monthly income of approximately $2,800 (Tr. 88). In April 
2007, she started working in real estate. She claimed in 2007 she made $8,000 in 
commissions for two property sales, and that she applied that money towards payment 
of her $78,000 judgment and other debts. She presented no evidence to support this 
claim. Her plan is to use part of her future real estate commissions’ income to pay her 
delinquent debts.  
 
She considered consolidating her debts once, but she would rather pay the debts 
herself and not have to pay additional interest and fees. Applicant presented no 
evidence of any measures she has taken to avoid future financial difficulties. There is no 
evidence she has ever sought or received financial counseling. 
 
Between 1999 and 2004, Applicant issued five bad checks (SOR ¶¶ 2a, b, d, e, 
and f). She claimed many of the bad checks were caused by her financial problems, 
and because of her and her ex-husband’s failure to coordinate funds and issuing checks 
from a joint check account. Although she has been charged with criminal offenses for 
uttering the bad checks, Applicant was never prosecuted because she paid the bad 
checks before trial (Tr. 35).  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a concerns two $7,500 checks she post-dated and issued to a friend to 
pay him for a $14,000 loan she received to pay another debt (Tr. 65-66). She claimed 
her friend needed the money and cashed the check before the check’s post-date.  
 
Regarding SOR ¶ 2.c, Applicant explained she paid her car insurance on a 
monthly basis. While on work related travel, she allowed a friend to use her car which 
was uninsured, and he was involved in an accident. Applicant re-insured her car and 
then filed an insurance claim for the accident (Tr. 36, 69-71, GE 2). The insurance 
company discovered her car was not insured at the time of the accident and asked to be 
reimbursed the claim money. Applicant had paid for the car repairs, and did not have 
the money. She was arrested and charged with theft. She plea bargained to a charge of 
“False/Misleading Information,” paid $9,700 in restitution, and served two days jail. 
 
Applicant received solid recommendations from her current facility security 
officer, business operations manager, co-worker, and supervisor (AEs 1-4). She is 
considered to be a hard-working and dedicated employee. In general, they believe she 
is trustworthy, and a dependable and reliable employee. They recommended her for a 
security clearance. 
 
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor, and considering her testimony in light of 
the record evidence, I find Applicant’s testimony was less than candid. She minimized 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
her questionable behavior and failed to take full responsibility for her actions. She was 
not credible in her testimony concerning the efforts she took to resolve her delinquent 
debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                     
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s  
 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
 As of her hearing date, Applicant has 12 delinquent debts, including three 
judgments, which have been charged off or in collection for many years, totaling 
approximately $16,600. AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 
19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“consistent 
spending beyond one’s means . . .”), apply in this case.  
 
 AG & 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), and the record 
evidence as a whole,6 I conclude that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant 
presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact creditors, or to resolve any of the 
debts since she acquired them up until receipt of the SOR. Nor is there any evidence 
that she has participated in any financial counseling.  
 
 I specifically considered AG ¶ 20(b) (“The conditions that resulted in the financial 
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
6  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
8 
 
 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)” and AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”), and 
conclude that they apply, but only to a limited extent.  
 
Applicant’s testimony raised mitigating factors that may be considered as 
circumstances beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., she 
was a divorced mother of two, received no child support, and acquired many of her 
debts as a result of her divorce. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient 
to show she has dealt responsibly with her financial obligations. She presented little 
evidence to show paid debts, settlement agreements, documented negotiations, 
payment plans, budgets, financial assistance/counseling before receipt of the SOR.  
 
 Regarding AG ¶ 20(d), I considered Applicant recently started making payment 
agreements and paying some of her debts. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s financial history 
and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that she has established a track 
record of financial responsibility. She failed to establish that she received financial 
counseling, and that the problem is being resolved or is under control (AG ¶ 20(c)). She 
also failed to provide documentation that she properly disputed the legitimacy of any of 
the debts (AG ¶ 20(e)). Based on the available evidence, her financial problems are 
recent, not isolated, ongoing, and are likely to be a concern in the future. Moreover, 
Applicant is financially overextended and has engaged in illegal acts to overcome her 
financial problems. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 From 1999 and 2004, Applicant issued five bad checks (SOR ¶¶ 2a, b, d, e, and 
f), and was arrested and charged with uttering worthless checks. Additionally, she was 
found guilty of “False/Misleading Information” for falsifying an insurance claim, and was 
accused of theft while working as a bookkeeper. Taken together, these incidents create 
doubts about Applicant’s judgment, and her ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. Criminal Conduct disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted,” apply. 
 
 AG & 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31(a). After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find 
that none apply. Her criminal behavior is recent, the circumstances that caused her 
questionable behavior (financial problems) are still present in Applicant’s life, and her 
questionable behavior is likely to recur. Moreover, having observed Applicant’s 
demeanor, and considering her testimony in light of the record evidence, I find 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s testimony was not fully candid and forthright, and that she tried to minimize 
her questionable behavior. In sum, she lacks credibility and is not trustworthy. 
Applicant’s overall behavior cast serious doubts about her judgment, reliability, and 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. Furthermore, her lack of 
credibility and honesty show Applicant has not learned from her mistakes, that her 
questionable behavior is likely to recur, and such behavior cast doubts on her 
rehabilitation. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a),  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, educated and 
hard-working employee. She has been successful working for a defense contractor for 
approximately two years. Her character references recommended she receive a 
security clearance. During the last two years working for her employer, she has earned 
a reputation as a trustworthy, reliable, and dependable employee. Notwithstanding, as 
previously discussed under Guidelines F and J, Applicant’s financial problems, criminal 
behavior, and lack of credibility and trustworthiness outweigh her favorable information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations and criminal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
