 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-03037 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Redacted], Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on February 27, 2006. On 
November 19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 28, 2007; answered it 
on December 15, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on December 20, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on January 31, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on February 14, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 20, 2008, scheduling it for February 28, 
2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 19 
 
2 
 
 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, 
presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A 
through D, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open until March 14, 2008 to enable her to submit additional evidence. On 
March 14, 2008 Applicant timely submitted AX E and F, and requested additional time 
to submit evidence. The request for an extension of time and my response extending 
the deadline until March 28, 2008, are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. 
Applicant timely submitted AX G and H. Her additional evidence was admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX E through H is attached to the record 
as HX II. Applicant’s rebuttal to HX II is attached as HX III. The record closed on March 
28, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 10, 2008, but it 
was incomplete. A corrected transcript was requested on April 25, 2008, and received 
on April 30, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice of Hearing 
 
 The written hearing notice was dated February 20, 2008, and the hearing 
convened on February 28, 2008, giving Applicant less than the 15-day notice to which 
she is entitled under the Directive ¶ E3.1.8. Before the formal hearing notice was 
issued, she had discussed the hearing date and exchanged email with Department 
Counsel, and agreed to schedule the case for February 28, 2008.  She waived the 15-
day notice requirement, with the understanding she would be given additional time after 
the hearing to submit documents (Tr. 8-9). As noted above, the record was held open 
until March 28, 2008, and she timely submitted additional evidence. Her last 
submission, dated March 27, 2008, affirmatively stated, “We will not be submitting any 
more documents and eagerly await your decision.” 
 
Unauthenticated Reports of Investigation 
 
 Department Counsel offered two personal subject interviews (GX 16 and 17 
extracted from reports of investigation, without presenting an authenticating witness as 
required by Directive ¶ 3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, 
and she affirmatively waived it (Tr. 51-54). 
 
Credit Reports 
 
 Applicant objected to six credit reports (GX 6 through 11), because they were 
outdated. I overruled the objection but explained to Applicant that she was free to 
present more recent credit reports or contradict the information in GX 6 through 11. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.g. Her admissions in her answer to the 
 
3 
 
 
SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following 
findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old senior electrical designer for a defense contractor. She 
has worked for her current employer and held a security clearance since July 1997. Her 
clearance was suspended in June 2007 (GX 3 at 1; Tr. 12). She studied electrical 
architecture in college for four years but was a few credits short of the requirements for 
a degree (Tr. 11-12). She was married in November 1984 and has three children.  
 
 A coworker who has worked for Applicant’s employer for 25 years, holds a 
security clearance, and has worked with Applicant for five years described her as hard-
working, very religious, devoted to her family, very frugal, and having a “heart of gold.”  
The witness testified he was unaware of any security violations during the past five 
years, but that Applicant is the kind of person who would self-report any security 
violation (Tr. 30-37). 
 
 Another coworker who has worked for Applicant’s employer for 26 years, holds a 
security clearance, and known her for three years described her as a reliable person 
who “keeps to herself.” The witness would not hesitate to recommend Applicant for a 
security clearance (Tr. 43). 
 
 Applicant and her husband moved to the Northeast U.S. in 1988, where they 
both worked for a defense contractor. They found the cost of living very expensive. 
Applicant’s husband handled the family finances, including filing income tax returns, and 
he decided to increase their federal income tax exemptions to “99,” resulting in no taxes 
being withheld from their paychecks.  
 
Applicant signed the joint returns but was unaware of her husband’s action to 
avoid tax withholding (Tr. 75). When they filed their returns, she asked her husband why 
they owed so much money to the Internal Revenue Service, and she accepted his 
vague explanation about owing a lot of money because they made a lot of money. She 
does not like to be involved with money (Tr. 107).  
 
Because no taxes were withheld, Applicant and her husband were unable to pay 
the federal income taxes due when they filed their returns for tax years 1989 and 1992 
through 2000, resulting in the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. They made 
periodic payments over the years, reducing the amount due from about $140,688 (GX 
13) to about $75,662 (AX D). Applicant’s husband testified they had been unable to 
negotiate a payment plan, because the IRS insisted on monthly payments of $4,000, 
which they could not afford (Tr. 65, 75). In January 2008 they made an offer in 
compromise for $15,000. However, as of the date the record closed, they had not 
received a response (Tr. 88).  
 
Applicant and her husband did not pay state income taxes for the years 1992 to 
1995, resulting in the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. (GX 14; GX 16 at 2). They moved to 
 
4 
 
 
another state in 1997, and a wage garnishment for $1,679 was filed by this state against 
Applicant’s pay (GX 12). This debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 During the years 2000 to 2004, Applicant’s husband gambled extensively. 
Accordingly to casino records, he lost $8,892 in 2000, lost $9,883 in 2001, won $16,065 
in 2003, and lost $8,724 in 2004 (AX H). He testified Applicant tried to stop his gambling 
“plenty of times,” but without success (Tr. 80). Her husband testified he stopped 
gambling “a couple of years ago,” but he did not seek any counseling because he did 
not believe he needed it (Tr. 83). Around 2003, when Applicant learned about her 
husband’s gambling, she took responsibility for the household accounts, but he 
remained responsible for filing the tax returns (Tr. 80-81). 
 
 Applicant’s husband was laid off in September 2003 and was unemployed until 
November 2003, and then he worked only for about a month because he was 
hospitalized for emergency heart surgery (AX C; Tr. 64). He was unable to work for five 
or six months after his surgery (Tr. 85). He worked for a defense contractor from 
December 2006 to May 2007, when he was laid off. He limited his work hours to 32 
hours per week because of his health. He was unemployed in May and June 2007, was 
hired by a government contractor, and laid off again after three weeks. He has worked 
for his current employer, a government contractor, since June 2007 (GX 4 at 8).  
 
 In early 2004, Applicant and her husband made an offer in compromise, 
intending to pay their delinquent taxes with a $30,000 loan from her brother-in-law if the 
offer was accepted (Tr. 65; GX 5). They received the loan but their offer in compromise 
was rejected. 
 
 In October 2004, Applicant and her husband filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition. They listed total assets of $35,455 and liabilities of $327,519. They received a 
discharge in January 2005 (GX 18 and 19). The tax debts were not discharged. Their 
bankruptcy petition and discharge are alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 The $30,000 loan from Applicant’s brother-in-law was not listed on the 
bankruptcy petition (GX 18) and apparently was not discharged. Applicant’s husband 
testified there is no fixed payment schedule for this debt, but they have continued to 
make periodic payments totaling about $7,000 (Tr. 85). 
 
 Applicant and her husband do not maintain a household budget (Tr. 87). Her 
husband testified they pay their bills as they come in, and they have only $500 left at the 
end of the month (Tr. 66, 87). However, the evidence about their financial situation is 
conflicting. In July 2006, Applicant told a security investigator that they had a net 
monthly remainder of about $5,000. She also told the investigator she has about 
$15,000 in her 401(k) account and $4,000 in bank savings (GX 16 at 3). In August 
2007, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting total household 
income of $9,666 per month, monthly expenses of $4,769, debt payments of $2,361, a 
net remainder of $2,536, and savings of only $300 (GX 4 at 9).  
  
 
5 
 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant and her husband had made a $600 
payment on the state tax garnishment for $1,679 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b (AX E and F), 
satisfied the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c (AX G at 2), and were awaiting a 
response to their offer in compromise of the federal income tax debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d, 1.e, and 1.f (AX D). They had disputed the credit card entry showing a delinquent 
credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and the adverse credit report entry had been 
corrected (AX G at 3).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@  AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  AG ¶ 
19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@   
 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not 
raised because, while there is evidence of her husband’s irresponsible gambling, there 
is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending” on her part. To the contrary, the 
evidence shows her to be frugal. 
 
It appears Applicant was not aware of her husband’s fraudulent tax scheme. She 
signed the joint tax forms without examining them, even after discovering they owed 
large sums when they filed. Her passive participation in the tax fraud was culpably 
negligent, but it does not raise AG ¶ 19(g). 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@  AG ¶ 20(a).  This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@  If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established, because the tax debts are still 
not resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) also is not established because 
Applicant has a long history of financial problems. The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is 
not established because Applicant remains passive about financial matters and 
continues to trust her husband to handle all tax matters. Her lack of attention to her tax 
situation even after she suspected something was amiss casts doubt on her good 
judgment.  I conclude ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
 The financial problems caused by Applicant’s husband’s compulsive gambling, 
periods of unemployment, and serious illness were beyond her control. His tax fraud 
was not beyond her control, because she chose not to exercise control. The unresolved 
debts are all related to delinquent taxes, triggered by her husband’s tax fraud and her 
failure to examine the tax returns before signing them. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Neither 
Applicant nor her husband has received counseling of any type, and their tax problems 
are not yet under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).   
 
Applicant and her husband successfully settled the state tax lien alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.c. They have made periodic payments on their delinquent federal taxes for several 
years but have been unable to negotiate a payment plan. Applicant’s husband testified 
they have a net monthly remainder of only about $500 and cannot afford the $4,000 
monthly payment demanded by the IRS. However, in July 2006 Applicant told a security 
investigator they had a monthly remainder of $5,000. In her personal financial statement 
in August 2007, she reported a monthly remainder of only $2,536. This conflicting 
financial information makes it impossible to determine whether Applicant and her 
husband could have afforded the payment plan offered by the IRS. They have not 
received an answer to their offer in compromise. In light of the conflicting evidence 
regarding their financial situation, I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
and her husband successfully disputed the credit report showing a delinquent credit 
card debt and they provided documented proof that the dispute was resolved in their 
favor. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
9 
 
 
 
 Applicant presented herself at the hearing as soft-spoken, somewhat shy, and 
sincere. She dislikes dealing with money. It was clear that her husband is the dominant 
figure in the management of family finances, and she trusts him in spite of his track 
record of tax fraud and excessive gambling. She and her husband do not maintain a 
family budget, and they have no firm plan for resolving their tax situation if the offer in 
compromise is rejected. Unless their tax situation is resolved, she will remain vulnerable 
to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. She has entrusted resolution of the tax 
debts to her husband, whose track record on financial management does not inspire 
confidence. Given her personality and distaste for financial matters, it appears likely that 
she will continue her passive, uninvolved approach to their tax situation. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
