 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05853 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his criminal conduct, 
personal conduct, and financial issues. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
On January 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 4, 2008, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 7, 2008, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge pursuant to ¶ 
 
2 
 
E3.1.7 of the Directive. The request is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The case was 
assigned to me on March 31, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 1, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 28, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 7, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
The SOR references “ADP” positions. Department Counsel made an oral motion 
to amend the SOR by deleting any reference to ADP positions and substituting 
appropriate “security clearance” language. Applicant did not object to the motion and it 
was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 68-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a Bachelor 
of Science degree. He served in the U.S. Navy on active duty from 1959 to 1963 and 
then in the Naval Reserve until 1989. He retired as a chief petty officer. He has worked 
for his current employer since 2001. He was married and divorced three times and is 
currently married. He has three adult children.1  
 
 Applicant was driving a motorcycle in August 2000. A truck sounded its horn 
behind him. He became distracted and bumped the car in front of him with his 
motorcycle. Applicant and the driver of the car he struck both pulled their vehicles to the 
side of the road and saw there was no damage to the car. He then returned to the road 
and saw the truck that beeped the horn. He chased after the truck and followed it to a 
parking lot. He went up to the woman driving the truck, got in an argument and 
physically assaulted her by slapping her. Applicant does not dispute the above events. 
He and the victim provided different specifics of the events. Applicant’s versions are 
also inconsistent. He told an investigator in 2006, that he returned to the road after the 
minor accident and he happened to see the truck stopped in a parking lot. This is 
inconsistent with his testimony that he chased the truck. He testified that when he went 
up to her truck, “she was just a very aggravating kind of person.” He stated he reached 
in the window and slapped her, but did not otherwise strike her and did no damage to 
her truck.2 He testified: 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 41-46; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 49, 59, 78-79; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
She was a very large person to start with. And the way she was talking to 
me was very agitating. I mean she was just, very brazen and I just lost my 
temper.3 
 
 The victim’s description as taken from the criminal and civil complaints was 
different. She stated that after Applicant and the other car pulled to the side of the road, 
she continued driving. Applicant caught up to her and started sounding his horn at her. 
When she pulled off on a ramp, he passed her and stopped his motorcycle at the top of 
the ramp, blocking her way. He got off his motorcycle and approached her, but she 
drove around him. He followed her as she pulled into a parking lot. He went up to her 
truck, screamed and used profanity toward her, opened the door, and struck her in the 
face with his hand. As she was attempting to get out of the truck, he slammed the door 
on her leg. Four witnesses observed the assault. She asked for help and said to call 
911. She pulled a pad from her purse to write his license number but he grabbed the 
pad from her hand. She grabbed it back and wrote down the plate number. He covered 
his license plate with a glove and left the scene. She provided the police with the license 
plate number and identified the Applicant in a photo line-up.4   
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with battery and damage to personal 
property. He pled guilty to battery and the damage to personal property charge was 
dismissed. He was sentenced to 10 days in jail, suspended, one year of unsupervised 
probation, 30 hours of community service, and fined $76. He served his probation 
without incident.5  
 
 The victim of Applicant’s assault sued him for damages. There was a jury trial in 
February 2004, in which Applicant appeared and was represented by counsel. She was 
awarded compensatory damages of $25,000 and punitive damages of $125,000. 
Interest was also ordered on the judgment to accrue at the rate of 10% per annum from 
the date of the verdict until paid.6  
 
 Applicant has not paid any part of the judgment against him. He has stated that 
he does not plan on paying anything on the judgment. He told an investigator in 
September 2006, that he did not feel that it was a fair judgment, that he had a “lousy” 
lawyer, and that the court was stacked against him because he was not born in the 
state where the trial was held. He reiterated in a statement provided in a response to 
Interrogatories, dated November 28, 2007, “I have not made any payment toward the 
civil action judgment against me and I don’t intend to.” In his Answer to the SOR he 
stated, “[d]ue to no action taken I don’t believe that I will ever be presented with any 
determination of a payment plan or method of payment; therefore, until such a plan is 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 60. 
 
4 GE 2-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-3. 
 
6 Tr. at 47-49, 52; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE. 2, 4-6. 
 
 
4 
 
established I don’t plan to do anything about making payment.”7 He was asked about 
paying the judgment at his hearing: 
 
ADMIN. JUDGE: How about the judgment? Do you think it’s fair that you 
would have to –-  
 
APPLICANT: No, I don’t think that’s fair at all, Your Honor. I don’t think 
what I did deserves any of that at all, I really don’t. 
 
ADMIN. JUDGE: Are you not paying it because you don’t have the money 
or because you don’t think it’s fair or both? 
 
APPLICANT: Well, I don’t think it’s fair at all. And, of course, I don’t have 
$150,000.00.  I’m just barely trying to get all my debts paid off and like 
that. I just don’t think it’s fair at all. 
 
 ADMIN. JUDGE: I understand. 
 
APPLICANT: I really think I got railroaded out.  I’m not a [citizen of state 
where judgment issued]. And [state where judgment issued], I think that 
has a lot to do with it. 
 
ADMIN. JUDGE: So I take it, even if you had the money, you would not 
pay it, voluntarily? 
 
APPLICANT: I would have to think about that one, Judge. If I had the 
money, it might be a different story, but I don’t have the money.8 
 
 Applicant married his current wife in 2005. She is from another country. He has 
not told her about his conviction or about the judgment against him. He stated that he 
just did not see a reason to tell her about it. His co-workers are also unaware of the 
conviction and judgment. Applicant testified that while he was not proud of his 
conviction, he would reveal it if necessary, and it could not be used as a basis for 
blackmail or coercion.9 
 
 Applicant responded to a DOHA Interrogatory on May 28, 2004, asking him to 
provide the result of the lawsuit held in February 2004. He responded: 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 52-54; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 61-62. 
 
9 Tr. at 76-78. 
 
 
5 
 
The outcome of the civil lawsuit against me was that I pay one hundred 
fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) to the plaintiff plus 10% interest per 
annum until paid. No payment of settlement has been determined.10 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on June 16, 2006. Applicant listed his conviction for battery under the 
question that asked about his police record. Question 28a asked, “In the last 7 years, 
have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He answered “No.” Question 
29, asked, “In the last 7 years, have you been a party to any public court actions not 
listed elsewhere on this form?” He answered “No,” but he listed a “[c]ivil suit resulting 
from traffic accident” and “[s]uit went to court and plaintiff won but no further action 
occurred.”11  
 
Applicant denied the two falsification allegations in the SOR. He stated he 
already provided the requested information via the Interrogatory.12 I considered all the 
evidence, including the Interrogatory and the derogatory information that Applicant 
included in the Questionnaire. I find there is insufficient evidence for a finding that 
Applicant intentionally falsified his Questionnaire for National Security Positions as 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
                                                          
10 AE A. 
 
11 GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 28-33. 
 
 
6 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 30 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant was arrested and convicted of battery against a woman after a traffic 
incident. This raises both of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
7 
 
Four Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant was pressured or coerced into committing his 
criminal act. AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) are not applicable. The incident happened almost 
eight years ago and there is no other criminal record or history of similar incidents. 
Applicant says he is sorry about the incident, but does not appear particularly 
remorseful. He continues to blame the victim of the assault for causing him to lose his 
temper. He has also refused to pay any of the judgment which a civil court ordered him 
to pay to the victim of his assault. Applicant was 60 years old when he committed this 
assault, an age where he should have known better. While there is some evidence of 
successful rehabilitation, I am unable to find that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
applicable. AG ¶ 32(d) has been raised as a factor for consideration.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
 
8 
 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant omitted some information from his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions; however, he had already provided the information to DOHA through an 
Interrogatory. There is insufficient evidence to find that it was a deliberate omission. AG 
¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.a alleges the $150,000 judgment addressed above. The judgment is 
not personal conduct on Applicant’s part. It is a court order for him to pay substantial 
money based upon his personal conduct, i.e., the battery of the woman in the truck. 
That behavior was shocking and reprehensible. It also resulted in a $150,000 judgment 
that is accruing interest at 10% per year. His actions made him vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable.  
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 There was no evidence that Applicant obtained counseling for the anger that led 
to the assault. He admitted he slapped the woman and pled guilty to the battery in his 
criminal trial. I am unable to state the behavior is unlikely to recur for the same rationale 
provided under the discussion for criminal conduct. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not 
applicable. His wife and co-workers are unaware of the conviction and judgment. He 
has refused to pay the $150,000 judgment which is growing by 10% every year. He has 
not sufficiently lessened his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress to 
raise AG ¶ 17(e) as a mitigating condition.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a judgment against him for $150,000 that is accumulating interest 
at the rate of 10% per annum. Both of the above potentially disqualifying conditions 
have been raised.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
10 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The judgment against Applicant was the result of his criminal assault. He has 
refused to pay any part of the judgment. No mitigating condition is applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 68 years old. When he 
was 60, he chased a woman on his motorcycle, caught her, and physically assaulted 
her. He pled guilty to battery. She sued him and won a judgment against him for 
$150,000, which is accruing 10% interest per year. He refuses to pay the judgment 
because he does not think it is fair and he does not have the money to pay it. He 
continues to blame the woman he assaulted for aggravating him to the point where he 
lost his temper. I also considered that this was a one-time incident in an otherwise clean 
record. He has a stable work record and served honorably for an extended period in our 
armed forces. Despite the positive evidence, Applicant’s actions raise serious concerns 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct, personal conduct, and financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
