 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05155 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ethan D. Dunn, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On March 22, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On December 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 18, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I received the case assignment on February 25, 
2008.  DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 10, 2008, and I convened the 
 
 
 
 
2
hearing as scheduled on April 1, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through N without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 
9, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. 12). The request and the attached documents were 
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Administrative Notice 
Exhibits (Exh.) I through V. Applicant’s counsel did not object to my consideration of 
those Exhibits. (Id.). Hence, the facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of 
general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. Those facts are set 
out in the Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 18, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c of the SOR.  Those admissions are incorporated into 
the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in Iraq. He graduated from high school in 
1984, and was involuntarily conscripted into the Iraqi army from 1986 to 1989. From 
1990 to 1997, he was married to his cousin, an Iraqi citizen.  
 
 In 1991, Applicant and three brothers left Iraq because they did not want to serve 
in Saddam Hussein’s army or regime. (Tr. 88). They became refugees in Saudi Arabia 
for three years before arriving in the United States in August 1994. He became a 
naturalized citizen in August 2000. (Tr. 45). Subsequent to his arrival here, he worked at 
various jobs and experienced a period of unemployment. He began his current position 
as a linguist with a federal contract in March 2004.  He wanted to work for the U.S. 
troops out of his sense of gratitude and loyalty to the United States for allowing him to 
emigrate here.  (Tr. 94). 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Iraq. His father is deceased and his elderly 
mother resides there. She is 72 years old and was a housewife. He is one of ten 
children, all born in Iraq. Three brothers reside in the United States. One of those 
brothers is a naturalized citizen and two of them are permanent residents. One of his 
brothers is deceased and the other brother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. His four 
sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. (Tr. 77-78). 
 
 Applicant lives with one of his brothers, who is a permanent resident in the 
United States. (Tr. 75: GE 4). He has some contact with another brother living here, but 
does not communicate with the other brother. (Tr. 71-73). He has not had any contact 
 
 
 
 
3
with his brother or four sisters, who reside in Iraq, since he left in 1991. (Tr. 79). He 
appears to be estranged from his siblings living there.   
 
 After leaving Iraq in 1991, Applicant maintained some contact with his mother, 
although he did not see her again until September 2001, when he saw her in Syria 
where she was visiting. (GE 4). At that time, his mother introduced him to an Iraqi 
woman. In May 2002, he returned to Syria and married his second wife. She came to 
the United States in October 2003. (Tr. 51). When he returned home from Iraq in 
October 2004, he discovered his wife had moved out of their residence. (Tr. 55).  After 
she left, he stopped communicating with her. He has no knowledge of her whereabouts, 
as she married another man. They were divorced in January 2008. (AE A). 
 
 Applicant began working as an Arabic translator for the U.S. Army in March 
2004. From that time until January 2008, he worked in Iraq at various locations. He 
generally worked for six or seven months and then returned home for a couple weeks 
before going back for additional tours. While in Iraq, he did not contact any of his family 
siblings, but spoke to his mother every few months. (Tr. 59; 94; GE 4). None of his 
family, living in Iraq, is aware of his work with the U.S. forces. (Tr. 87).    
  
 Applicant submitted several exhibits attesting to his capabilities and contributions 
to the U.S. Armed Forces’ efforts in the war on terror. In October 2004, a lieutenant 
colonel of the Army brigade combat team for which Applicant worked, wrote a letter of 
recommendation. He stated that “[Applicant was employed as an Arabic Interpreter for 
Multi National Force Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, from 01 May to 29 
October 2004 . . . [Applicant’s ability to translate Arabic into English and his quick 
thinking made the difference between success and failure for out unit’s mission.” (AE 
H).  A major in that combat team noted an incident in September 2004 in which 
Applicant risked his life for a team member after their convoy was attacked by an 
explosive device. “[Applicant’s] actions were well above and beyond the actions 
required of an interpreter. His assistance was instrumental in saving the lives of two of 
the wounded soldiers.” (AE I).  A lieutenant colonel working with Applicant from March 
2005 to April 2005, stated, Applicant “was able to interpret flawlessly in all conditions.” 
(AE J). 
 
   A captain for the U.S. Army wrote in January 2006 that Applicant “is a dedicated 
worker who is willing to perform any assignment and any hours assigned to him.” (AE 
K). The captain and platoon leader of Applicant’s division from July 2006 to October 
2006, wrote in Applicant’s performance evaluation that “[Applicant] participated in over 
70 missions with coalition forces.” (AE L).  “[Applicant] worked with US Army leadership 
to help find, disrupt, and eliminate terrorist cells in and around the [city] area. [Applicant] 
bravely supported coalition forces everyday without fail. He faced personal danger and 
adversity with superior courage.” (Id.). Applicant received a Certificate of Appreciation 
from a Special Forces airborne company for his outstanding support from June 1, 2007 
to August 1, 2007. (AE N).           
 
  
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant previously owned two houses in 1999. (Tr. 85). He has a U.S. bank 
account. He does not own any property in Iraq. (Tr. 93). There is no derogatory 
information concerning his police record. He has never been fired from a job or 
arrested. He has never used illegal drugs, or been involved in an alcohol-related 
incident. (GE 1).  
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship at this 
hearing and desire to resume his work with the U.S. Army. He stated (sic), “So I mean I 
loyal to United State because it give me citizen, safe for my life and my brother, and 
they give me everything, benefit here, and freedom. I mean why not if I go help the 
American.” (Tr. 94). Currently, he is unemployed because his contract terminated, as a 
result of his security clearance issues. (Tr. 64; 90). He likes his job and wants to return 
to Iraq. He held an Interim Secret security clearance while in Iraq and handled classified 
information without breaching security regulations.      
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have target the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis.  Although the new governmental has taken 
aggressive action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high, as do 
human rights abuses. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as 
state intelligence services.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
 
 
 
5
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel....” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
 
 
 
6
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, brother and four sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. He 
has periodic contact with his mother. While Iraq struggles with the creation of a 
democracy, it continues to be routinely victimized by terrorist attacks. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest for Applicant. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) have been 
raised by the evidence. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Two conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interests. In 1991, he came here as a refugee and proudly became a 
naturalized citizen in 2000. He worked at various jobs since his arrival, until beginning 
his position with a federal contractor in 2004. He does not own any property in Iraq, but 
has a U.S. bank account. He has a close relationship with one of his brothers, with 
whom he resides in the United States. He is estranged from his siblings living in Iraq, 
and has periodic contact with his mother, residing there. He did not return to Iraq until 
2004, when he started his job with the U.S. forces. While there he did not communicate 
                                                          
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
with his siblings. His ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to his five 
siblings and elderly mother living in Iraq. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) has limited application to Applicant’s relationships with his mother, 
brother and four sisters. Since leaving Iraq in 1991, he has not had any contact with his 
siblings. He saw his mother once in 2001, and contacts her periodically. None of them 
know about the nature of his work. Although there is a remote possibility that terrorists 
could attempt to coerce or threaten Applicant through his mother or siblings, it is highly 
unlikely.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are 
hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even 
friendly governments, could attempt to use his siblings and mother, who live in Iraq, to 
obtain such information. Second, he had connections to Iraq before he left there in 
1991. He was born in Iraq and spent his formative years there. Third, his mother and 
five siblings remain citizens and residents of Iraq. Fourth, he maintains some contact 
with his mother. 
 
 
 
 
8
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He came to the United States as a refugee in 
1994 and became a naturalized citizen in 2000.  He has worked in the United States 
since his arrival and currently resides with his brother, who also came here as a 
refugee. He previously owned property in the United States, and currently has a bank 
account. Out of his sense of gratitude and dedication to the United States, he joined the 
U.S. Army, as an Arabic-speaking linguist. He takes his loyalty to the United States very 
seriously, and has worked diligently for a defense contractor for more than two years in 
an important capacity for our troops. I give great weight to the letters of 
recommendation, written by the soldiers with whom he served. They assess him as 
loyal and trustworthy, and praise his significant contributions to the cause of freedom in 
Iraq. After leaving Iraq in 1991, he did not return for 13 years and then solely for the 
purpose of helping the United States. No witnesses recommended denial of his security 
clearance. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause 
potential harm to the United States or failed to abide by his employer’s rules and 
regulations.  
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his tenure in Iraq without any 
indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact is not 
normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the nation security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognizes, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
