  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-09261
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on November 26, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s Answer was received on December 26, 2007, and he requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2008. The hearing took place
as scheduled on April 16, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on April 23, 2008.
The record was kept open until April 30, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity
to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted post-hearing matters,
which were forwarded by department counsel without objections. The post-hearing
matters are admitted as follows: (1) Exhibit E–cover letter; (2) Exhibit F–student loan
documents; (3) Exhibit G–satisfaction of judgment documents; (4) Exhibit H–university
transcript; and (5) Exhibit I–university program of study. 
Procedural Rulings
Without objections, Applicant’s Answer was amended to correct a transposition
error (Tr. 23–24). His response to SOR ¶ 1.c is amended to address SOR ¶ 1.d.
Likewise, his response to SOR ¶ 1.d is amended to address SOR ¶ 1.c 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges a history of financial problems as follows: (1)
four unpaid delinquent debts; (2) a judgment obtained in 2006 for $7,410; and (3) six
student loans referred for collection. His Answer was mixed. He denied the two debts
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and he admitted the remaining allegations in SOR ¶¶
1.c–1.k. Also, he provided an explanation for the debts as well as his overall financial
situation. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established
by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for
this company as a cost analyst since February 2005. He is seeking to obtain an
industrial security clearance for the first time. 
Applicant has never married and has no children. He attended college during
1995-2000 and graduated with a bachelor’s degree in accounting. His student loans
stem from this period. Since college, his employment history has been varied, to include
traditional accounting jobs, self-employment as a cable TV installer, and working in a
cabinet shop. The result was, at times, an inability to meet his financial obligations. 
3
Applicant decided to return to a desk job in 2005 when he accepted his current
job as a cost analyst. He enjoys his work and plans on continuing to work for his current
employer. To that end, his company is paying for him to obtain a degree in electrical
engineering because he will be a more valuable employee with engineering and
technical skills (Tr. 42; Exhibits H and I). 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is well documented (Exhibits 2, 3, and
4). The matters alleged in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions and the
admitted documentary evidence. Except for the student loans, Applicant has paid or
settled the debts, and he provided documentary evidence as proof-of-payment. He
defaulted on the student loans and the loans went into collection. Since about early
2007, he has made regular monthly payments, via a garnishment, on the student loans.
The debts, as alleged in the SOR, are summarized in the following table.
Debt Description Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–$166 collection account. Paid $166 in Feb. 2008 (Exhibit D).  
SOR ¶ 1.b–$294 collection account. Paid $294 in Feb. 2008 (Exhibit C).  
SOR ¶ 1.c–$1,842 charged-off account
for a credit card bill. 
Settled for $3,400 in Dec. 2007 (Exhibit
A, Attachment 2). 
SOR ¶ 1.d–$7,441 collection account for
a credit card bill. 
Same debt as SOR ¶ 1.k.   
SOR ¶¶ 1.e–1j–six student loans for
various amounts referred for collection in
about 2003. 
Making regular monthly payments since
early 2007; balance of $16,860 as of Apr.
2008 (Exhibit A, Attachment 3; Exhibit F).
SOR ¶ 1.k–$7,410 judgment obtained in
Dec. 2006. 
Settled for $6,320 in Oct. 2007 (Exhibit A,
Attachment 1; Exhibit B; Exhibit G).  
In addition to the payments, Applicant has taken other steps to improve his
overall financial condition. He has not had a rent payment since about July 2006 when
he moved into his parents’ home. He is taking care of their house as his parents are
working in Iraq. He expects that situation to continue for another 12 to 18 months and
he will likely move out at that time. Also in 2006, he sold his truck thereby eliminating a
large monthly loan payment. He used the sale proceeds to buy a used car for cash. 
Applicant is now able to meet his expenses and debt payments. He recently
opened a secured credit card account to improve his credit history. He contributes to a
401(k) retirement account and has a balance of about $11,000. He has about $1,300 in
the bank between checking and savings accounts. In the next 60 days or so, he expects
to receive about $9,500 before taxes from a sale of stock associated with the purchase
of his company. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions under Guideline F). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
 Revised Guidelines at 14. 18
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations16 17
within the meaning of Guideline F. The delinquent debts and the student loans in
collection are more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
The guideline provides that certain conditions  may mitigate security concerns.18
The most pertinent is MC 4, which requires a person to initiate a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve the debts. Applicant has done much to
demonstrate an intent to clean up his financial house. As summarized in the table
above, he has paid or settled four debts for a total of about $10,180. He has made
regular monthly payments, albeit by a garnishment, on the student loans since early
6
2007, and he has made progress in reducing the balance. Also, he has taken other
steps to reduce his expenses. Taken together, these circumstances are substantial
evidence of a good-faith effort within the meaning of the guideline. 
To sum up under the whole-person concept, Applicant struggled financially after
graduating from college and entering the workforce. His irregular employment affected
his ability to pay his debts. He has had steady employment in his current job since
2005, and he intends to continue working for this company. His overall financial
condition has improved, he is now exercising more financial responsibility, and it is
unlikely that he will experience similar financial problems in the future. 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national interest  to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
