1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-04822
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                            
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be granted.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 17,
2006. On December 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 23, 2007. He
answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
Response to SOR, dated January 22, 2008, at 1-2; GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application, dated1
November 17, 2008) at 32.
GE 1, supra note 1, at 7-10, 20-21; Tr. 20-21.2
GE 1, supra note 1, at 11-14; Tr. 21.3
Tr. 22, 43.4
2
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 31, 2008. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 14, 2008, and I received the case
assignment on February 19, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 24, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 30, 2008. The government offered six
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He submitted four exhibits (AE) A
through D, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 9, 2008. I held the record open until
May 14, 2008 for Applicant to submit additional matters.  On May 12, 2008, he
submitted one additional document, which has been marked and received as AE E,
without objection. The record closed on May 14, 2008.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 22, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.d of the SOR. He completed his security clearance application on
November 17, 2006.   1
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works as an instructor for a Department of
Defense contractor, a position he started in June 2006. Applicant enlisted in the United
States Navy in 1975 and received an honorable discharge in 1989 after more than 13
years of service. He held a top secret clearance while in the Navy without any
violations. Since 1989, he has worked for Department of Defense contractors and has
held a secret clearance without incident.2
Applicant married his first wife in 1977. She died in 1998 as a result of brain
cancer. He has one son, now age 27, from this relationship. Applicant married his
present wife in 2003.3
Physicians diagnosed Applicant’s first wife with diabetes and schizophrenic
paranoia. Her medical problems created financial problems throughout their marriage,
particularly when his Navy duty assignments took him to sea. When he returned from
sea duty, he found the utilities shut off and the bills unpaid. He would pay the bills upon
his return. When his wife died, he incurred significant medical bills, after insurance
payments. He paid these bills.  4
Around the time his wife died, his job required him to move from State A to State
B, if he wanted to continue working. He owned a trailer in State A, which he tried to sell.
Tr. 22-23.5
Tr. 24-25.6
GE 3 (Interrogatories and Applicant’s answers, dated July 6, 2007) at 3-5; Tr. 37, 39-40, 53-55.7
GE 2 (Interrogatories and Applicant’s answers, dated June 5, 2007) at 2-3, 6, 10-14; AE A (Letter, dated April8
28, 2008); Tr. 26.
3
He found a prospective buyer, but she did not qualify for a mortgage. He made
arrangements for her to pay her monthly rent on the trailer directly to the mortgagor. If
she did so in a timely manner for a year, the mortgagor would qualify her for a
mortgage. His renter got behind in the payments on several occasions, but would then
catch up on her payments. However, in 2001 after she again failed to make the monthly
payments, the mortgagor initiated foreclosure procedures and notified Applicant of its
actions. Applicant lacked the financial resources to pay the overdue mortgage payments
and advised the mortgagor to proceed with foreclosure. He heard nothing further from
the mortgagor.  5
Three years later, In 2004, a new creditor contacted Applicant about the unpaid
debt remaining from the foreclosure. He told the creditor that he could not pay the debt
as he was losing his job. Applicant’s employer laid him off in December 2004. During his
period of unemployment, he paid his bills with his unemployment and money from his
401k. When these funds were exhausted, he defaulted on his financial obligations. His
wife did work part-time. In September 2005, he obtained a job paying $8 an hour. With
his low paying job and his wife’s part-time job, they were able to meet minimal monthly
living expenses. After obtaining his current employment, he slowly began to repay
debts.6
Applicant’s gross monthly income totals $4,167 and his net monthly income totals
$2,800. His current monthly expenses include $450 for an equity loan on his home,
$465 for utilities, $250 for food, $180 for automobile expenses, $100 for clothing, and
$200 for miscellaneous items totaling approximately $1,650. He owns two cars, without
any debt. He has a company credit card, but no personal credit cards.  7
For the last year, Applicant has paid old debt, much of which is not listed in the
SOR. He also pays $125 a month on the debt alleged in ¶ 1.a of the SOR. He began his
payments on this debt in May 2007. His current balance is $1,729.8
Applicant’s largest debt in the SOR related to the unpaid balance on the trailer
mortgage after the foreclosure sale. The current creditor, the third owner of the debt,
contacted him in March 2008 and offered to settle his debt for $10,000. To accept this
offer, he contacted his current mortgagor and obtained an equity loan on his home. He
GE 2, supra note 8, at 14; GE 6 (Credit report, dated October 18, 2007) at 2; AE B (Letter, dated April 21,9
2008); AE D (Credit profile, dated April 2, 2008); AE E (Letter, dated May 9, 2008); Tr. 27-34, 42.
Tr. 43, 54-57.10
4
paid the settlement offer, which settled his debt in full. He also paid the two remaining
small credit card debts of $259 and $417. Applicant has no other unpaid debts.   9
Applicant acknowledges that he is a poor manager of money. Thus, his wife now
handles the family finances. He currently has no outstanding, unpaid debts. He can pay
his current monthly expense. He likes his current financial status and intends to remain
debt free.10
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
5
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt after his first wife died and
after he lost his job. Although he paid his debts for a period of time, he ultimately
defaulted on his financial obligations. His unpaid debt existed for several years. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial problems were a constant problem during his first marriage, when he was on
sea duty. After his first wife died, he incurred more debts related to her medical bills and
his job changes or loss. As continuous employment is not guaranteed, there is a
possibility he will be unemployed in the future. This mitigating condition does not apply.
6
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above,
Applicant’s more recent financial problems began 10 years ago when his first wife
became seriously ill and eventually died, leaving him with unpaid medical bills. At the
same time, his job required him to move to another state. When he could not sell his
trailer, he rented to an individual who agreed to make the rental payments directly to his
mortgagor. When she failed to meet the payments, he allowed the property to go to
foreclosure as he was losing his job and did not have funds to pay the outstanding debt.
I find this potentially mitigating condition applies in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant did not receive financial counseling. However, he
has resolved all of his delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement, except one.
He continues to make the monthly payment on the one remaining debt, under the
payment plan he developed.  He is now financially sound and prepared for future
contingencies. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had financial problems for
many years during his first marriage. He managed his debts until after his first wife died
and his job required him to move to another state. In 2004, he lost his job. He attempted
7
to continue paying his monthly expenses, including credit card debt. When he
exhausted his monetary funds, he defaulted on his debts. Nine months after losing his
job, he accepted a low paying job, the first job he could find. The income from this job
enabled him to pay some household expenses, but did not provide him with any
additional resources to pay old debt. He obtained his current position in June 2006, and
started to resolve some old debt. For the last year, he has worked with creditors to
resolve his debts, and has successfully done so. Applicant has changed his attitude
towards the use of credit cards and his wife now manages the family finances because
he does not manage money well. Most significantly, he has taken affirmative action to
pay or resolve all his delinquent debts, including those debts which raise security
concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) As his debt is paid or under a payment plan, it cannot be
a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all
his debts are paidBit is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his
fitness to hold a security clearance. Applicant had a difficult financial situation for 18
months. When his income improved, he slowly worked on paying his debts. Besides the
one old debt he is paying monthly, he has only one debt, an equity loan on his house.
His lives within his financial means and does not live excessively. His old debts do not
raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1)-(9).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
