 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10252 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On January 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on February 14, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2008, scheduling the hearing for March 
26, 2008. Applicant was sick on the date of the hearing and requested a continuance. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel did not oppose the continuance and it was granted. DOHA issued 
an amended notice of hearing on April 1, 2008, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 22, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called three 
witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were received without 
objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until April 29, 2008, to 
submit additional matters through Department Counsel. No additional evidence was 
submitted. The record closed on April 29, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 30, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a Bachelor 
of Science degree awarded in May 2002. He has been with his current employer since 
December 2002. He is married with a two-year-old child and his wife is pregnant with 
their second child.1  
 
 Applicant first smoked marijuana in July 1997, before he started his senior year 
in high school. He played football and did not smoke marijuana in the fall of 1997. He 
smoked marijuana on several occasions during the spring of 1998. He started college in 
the fall of 1998. His marijuana use increased greatly to the point where he was smoking 
marijuana on an almost daily basis. He smoked marijuana on about 1,000 occasions. 
He bought marijuana on several occasions. He also contributed money when his friends 
would purchase marijuana. Sometimes friends would share their drugs with him. He 
also used other drugs during this time period. He estimated that he used cocaine about 
ten times; methamphetamine twice; hallucinogenic mushrooms four times; and ecstasy 
five times.2  
 
 Applicant and his friends were caught using marijuana in a dorm room by the 
campus security. They were not arrested but were placed on school probation for a 
year. He continued to smoke marijuana, but did it off campus. He also feels that his 
drug use contributed to his not playing football in college, which is one of his regrets. 
His grades in college were good, but he realizes that they could have been much better 
if he was not using drugs.3 
 
 Applicant continued to use drugs, but less frequently, after he graduated from 
college. His company had a policy against drug use and required a drug test as a 
condition of employment. Applicant passed the test by abstaining from drugs for several 
weeks prior to the test. There were no additional tests after he was hired. His future wife 
worked for the same company as he did for about four months in 2004 to 2005. 
Applicant met her in November 2004. She was and is against illegal drugs and would 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 47-48, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 59-62, 81-87; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 76-79; 87-88, 96-97. 
 
 
3 
 
not have dated a drug user. He decided to completely stop using illegal drugs. He has 
not used illegal drugs since December 2004. They married in 2005.4 
 
 Applicant’s father became sick and passed away in the summer of 2005. This 
also spurred a change in Applicant. As the only son, he took charge of assisting his 
mother and his sisters. Family became more important to him. He works fairly long 
hours. He spends most of his off time with his wife, child and their families. They spend 
every Tuesday night with his mother. He usually sees one of his sisters and her 
husband during the visits. His other sister lives in another state. His father-in-law and 
mother-in-law are divorced. Applicant and his wife spend most Saturdays with her father 
and most Sundays with her mother. Applicant and his wife bought a townhouse in 2005. 
With their growing family, they are in the process of buying a single family house. They 
will put their townhouse up for rent.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), 
certified as true on October 24, 2006. He completely listed his illegal drug use in the 
Questionnaire.6   
 
 Applicant stated that he has almost no contact with individuals that still use 
drugs. Most of his friends from high school and college have stopped using drugs. He is 
into fantasy sports leagues and is still is in contact telephonically with a friend that he 
used drugs with, who shares the same interest, but he no longer sees him. His friends 
know that he no longer uses drugs, so if any are using, they do not do it in his presence. 
The last time he was aware of a friend smoking marijuana was in March 2005, when he 
believes a friend was smoking marijuana in his room while Applicant and others were 
outside the house waiting for him.7  
 
 Applicant testified that he will never use illegal drugs again.8 He signed a 
statement of intent on April 21, 2008, stating: 
 
I, [Applicant] have not abused [illegal] drugs since the end of 2004. I 
intend not to abuse drugs in the future and agree to automatic revocation 
of any security clearance I might have for any violation involving abuse of 
drugs.9 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 59-62, 89-92; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 59-62, 70; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 70-72, 92-95, 98. 
 
8 Tr. at 72-73. 
 
9 AE H. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisals indicate that he is a conscientious, dedicated, 
and highly-valued employee. He has been promoted five times since January 2004. He 
is now earning a significant salary. He is one of the top performers on his manager’s 
team. She testified that Applicant is ethical, very honest, trustworthy, and he has very 
good judgment. His supervisor testified that Applicant has greatly matured since he 
began working with him in March 2005. He feels that the sudden illness and death of 
Applicant’s father triggered a positive transformation in Applicant. He described 
Applicant as having a tremendous work ethic, detail-oriented, honest, and reliable. Both 
witnesses are aware of his past drug use and both recommend him for a security 
clearance. Character letters on his behalf describe him with similar superlatives.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 16-42; AE A-G. 
 
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
 Applicant’s drug purchase, possession, and use are sufficient to raise the above 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant admitted to using illegal drugs up until about December 2004. He used 
marijuana almost daily when he was in college. He also used other illegal drugs. After 
he graduated college in 2002, he did not use as often, but his drug use continued. He 
met his future wife in November 2004, and things started changing. She is vehemently 
anti-drug. He decided that he needed a change in his life and if he was going to have 
any chance with her, that he would have to give up drugs. They fell in love, got married, 
had a baby, and his wife is pregnant with their second child. Family became very 
important to him, particularly after the sudden illness and passing of his father. He has 
not used drugs in more than three years and is not around people who are using drugs. 
He submitted “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.” I find that both AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 27 years old. He has 
clearly matured since he met his future wife in November 2004. They married, had a 
child, and have another one on the way. His father passed away in 2005. Family and his 
 
7 
 
job now dominate his life. He is highly regarded at work. He has received five 
promotions. His supervisor testified about how much Applicant has matured. His wife is 
very opposed to drugs. Applicant realizes that drugs may have cost him a chance to 
play college football. He does not want them to cost him his career and his family. It is 
not unusual to see great changes in someone’s life when they are in their twenties. 
Applicant has convinced me that he has changed. I am completely satisfied that illegal 
drugs are no longer a part of his life. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
