                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-12166 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On 
January 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her,2 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and 
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 4. There is no allegation of falsification of the 2006 SF 86.   
 
2GE 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Jan. 3, 2008). GE I is the source for the facts in the 
remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
On February 4, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (GE 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 4, 2008, was provided to her, 
and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.4 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on May 9, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for five debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f and 1.g), 
and said she did not recognize two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e). Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 46 years old.5 She married in 1981 and divorced in 1986. Her 
children were born in 1981 and 1984. She attended college from 1994 to 1997, and 
from 2000 to 2002. She received a Bachelor of Arts in Environmental Policy in 2002. 
She was unemployed from June 2002 to January 2004. From January 2004 to the 
present she has been employed by government contractor as a welder and in quality 
assurance. She joined the United States Army, but never went on active duty. She did 
not serve on active duty because the Army did not comply with her enlistment contract. 
She said she received a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions.6 She has no 
police record. She has not used illegal drugs in the last seven years, and has never 
used illegal drugs while in a sensitive position.  
 
3On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
4Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Mar. 12, 2008; and 
Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated March 21, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that she had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
5GE 4 (2006 security clearance application) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless 
stated otherwise. 
 
6 The file does not contain her military or enlistment records.  
 
3 
 
 
On her 2006 security clearance application, she disclosed that she had 
approximately $6,000 in delinquent debt, resulting from unemployment in 1999. She 
became a full-time student in 2000. She unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate with her 
creditors. She was a single mother, and her former husband was not paying child 
support. She chose to maintain her home and feed her family over repaying her 
creditors. She concluded, “Since then I have graduated [from] college and now I am 
responsible for student loans only, as my children are now grown adults and providing 
for themselves.” She did not explain what she was doing to resolve her delinquent 
debts. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR lists seven delinquent debts. Applicant denies the debts in SOR ¶ 1.b 
($4,173) and SOR ¶ 1.e ($319). The file does not contain any information corroborating 
the credit report, which is the sole evidence supporting her responsibility for these two 
debts. These two debts are therefore unsubstantiated because a credit report in the 
face of any conflicting evidence is simply too unreliable to support an allegation of 
delinquent debt (for example, the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e could be duplications of 
other debts, or relate to other debtors). 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for five debts totaling $7,331 in her SOR 
response (GE 3): 
 
(1) SOR ¶ 1.a ($500) was placed for collection in July 2000. 
 
(2) SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,563) was charged off in August 2001. 
 
(3) SOR ¶ 1.d ($3,367) was placed for collection on a department store account 
in February 2002. 
 
(4) SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,799) was placed for collection on a credit union account in 
December 2002. 
 
(5) SOR ¶ 1.g ($102) was placed for collection on a medical account in April 
2003.  
 
Applicant had ample warning about the security concerns pertaining to her 
delinquent debt. On April 2, 2007, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator interviewed her concerning her delinquent debts. She explained that 
because her efforts (mostly in 2000) to work with her creditors were refused, “she will 
allow these accounts to lapse. She has no intention to pay them.” (GE 6). Her gross 
monthly income is $7,600, and her net monthly income is $6,152. She pays $190 
monthly on her student loans, which have a balance of about $9,700 (GE 6). She does 
not currently have any credit cards (GE 6). Her two largest monthly expenses are her 
rent payment of $975 and her car payment of $685 (GE 6). After paying her monthly 
debts and expenses, she has monthly disposable income of $3,629 (GE 6). 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”7 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).8 
7 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
8 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her OPM interview, her 2006 
credit report, and her SOR response. She admitted responsibility for five debts totaling 
$7,331 in her SOR response. The government established the disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) 
because she did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve her delinquent 
debts.9  
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for five debts totaling about $7,331. Applicant is 
currently living in the same state where she attended college. She advised the OPM 
investigator in April 2007 that she thought her delinquent debts would lapse in 2013 (GE 
6). It is unclear when her last payments were made on these debts. If no payments 
were made after May 13, 2002, then some or all of these debts may not be legally 
enforceable debts because some of the creditors have not filed suit as required by the 
six-year Washington State statute of limitations. See Rev. Code Wash. § 4.16.040(1) 
(stating “an action upon a contract in writing, or liability express or implied arising out of 
a written agreement” must be filed within six years to preserve the creditor’s right to 
collect on the debt). The statute of limitation for contract actions in Washington state 
begins to run when a party knows or, in the exercise of due diligence, should know of 
the other party’s breach. Architechtonics Constr. Mgmt., Inc. v. Khorram, 111 Wn. App. 
725, 45 P.3d 1142 (2002), review denied, 148 Wn.2d 1005, 60 P.3d 1212 (2003). 
 
The South Carolina Court of Appeals succinctly explained the societal and 
judicial value of application of the statute of limitations: 
 
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that 
they stimulate activity, punish negligence and promote repose by giving 
security and stability to human affairs. The cornerstone policy consideration 
9“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
underlying statutes of limitations is the laudable goal of law to promote and 
achieve finality in litigation. Significantly, statutes of limitations provide 
potential defendants with certainty that after a set period of time, they will 
not be ha[iled] into court to defend time-barred claims. Moreover, limitations 
periods discourage plaintiffs from sitting on their rights. Statutes of 
limitations are, indeed, fundamental to our judicial system. 
   
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 363 S.C. 169, 175-76, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 
(S.C. Ct. App. 2005) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). This long-standing 
legal doctrine may well reduce or eliminate any potential vulnerability to improper 
financial inducements. The degree that she is “financially overextended,” is also 
reduced. However, there is a possibility the six-year statute of limitations was tolled or is 
otherwise not applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply because there is insufficient 
information to establish that Applicant established the statute of limitations defense to 
repayment of her debts or that she otherwise showed good faith10 in the resolution of 
her debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant did not provide “documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or [provide] evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue” with respect to his SOR debts. She disclosed very little information about 
these five debts. She did not provide proof of her most recent correspondence with her 
creditors. Based on the low level of evidence required to meet the substantial evidence 
test for establishment of a disqualifying condition, I conclude these five debts, totaling 
about $7,331 are still valid, delinquent debts, and that Applicant is responsible for them.   
 
Applicant did not disclose sufficiently unusual and recent circumstances as a 
cause for the delinquent debts to mitigate them for security clearance purposes. She did 
not provide proof of financial counseling. Applicant could easily pay or settle the debts in 
light of her current, ample income. She has elected not to pay or resolve her five 
delinquent debts. Her overall conduct with her creditors casts doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Her financial problems are continuing 
 
10The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
 
 
8 
 
 
and likely to recur. She should have been more diligent and made greater efforts to 
resolve her delinquent debts, especially after being interviewed by an OPM investigation 
in April 2007, followed by receipt of the SOR in January 2008. She has not carried her 
burden of proving her financial responsibility. Based on my evaluation of the record 
evidence as a whole, I conclude no mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG  ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in her favor. Her dedication to the 
welfare of her children supports approval of her clearance. There is no evidence of any 
security violation. Aside from her delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-criminal issue), 
she is a law-abiding citizen. She completed her college education, earning her Bachelor 
of Arts degree. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. 
Applicant was well aware of her financial responsibilities, and had ample resources to 
pay her creditors. She learned of the security significance of these delinquent debts in 
April 2007. His efforts to resolve her debts were insufficient when compared to available 
income that she could have used to address her delinquent debts (especially after April 
2007 when she became aware of their significance). She did not show adequate actions 
for timely resolution of his debts. Instead she chose to rely on the creditor’s failures to 
file lawsuits against her income and property. In sum, she did not make sufficient efforts 
to repay or resolve her debts after the contractor employed her, and her actions were 
not adequate to fully resolve security concerns.         
 
  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.    
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
11See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
