                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12416 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On January 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 29, 2008, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on March 17, 2008. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant on March 19, 2008, and it was received on March 25, 2008. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 2001. He 
served on active duty in the Navy from 1997 to 2001, and was honorably discharged. 
He is divorced and remarried and provides child support for his two children from his 
first marriage.  
 
 Applicant has 11 delinquent accounts, totaling approximately $11,461, that he 
admitted he owes, and he has not provided any proof of payment or resolution toward 
any of the accounts.1 He listed the debts on his security clearance application (SCA) 
that he signed on September 26, 2006.2 The accounts were referred for collection or 
charged off beginning in 2002 until 2006. Applicant has been continually employed 
since 1997 and with his current employer since 2001.3 In his December 5, 2006 
statement to an investigator from the Department of Defense, he stated he had spoken 
to a mortgage/loan officer who advised him not to pay the debts because it would 
reopen the accounts and thereby hurt his credit.4 He reiterated this response to 
interrogatories on October 26, 2007.5 In his answer to the SOR dated January 29, 2008, 
he stated:  
 
 I realize that I have a lot of old and negative marks on my credit report. I 
have taken this opportunity to take a hard look at my credit situation and 
have hired a credit counseling service, to help me target and clean up 
these old debts. The company is [A] and I have an account with them and 
am working to repair and correct my credit situation. I have enclosed my 
account details and their contact information.6 
1 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR 1.l. relieving the Government of having to prove it. The 
allegations stated that on January 5, 2007, an incident report was filed indicating Applicant’s company 
credit card was in arrears in the amount of $10,000 and he was unable to pay it due to litigation related to 
a personal family matter. On January 18, 2007, the report reflected that this account had been paid in full. 
The debt was paid 13 days after the incident report. I find for Applicant regarding this allegation.  
 
2On Applicant’s Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on 
September 26, 2006, he admitted he had eleven delinquent debts. The total he listed was $14,248.  
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant provided a three page document that introduces him to Company A’s 
program, their governing laws, and a limited power of attorney. Applicant signed the 
documents on January 29, 2008. No other information was provided as to what action 
Applicant has taken on his debts. There is no evidence Applicant has paid any of his 
delinquent debts or has set up any payment plans. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them, especially AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has eleven 
delinquent debts that remain unpaid. He listed them on his SCA in September 2006 and 
has not provided any information that he has attempted to resolve them. I find both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions. I especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”), (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”), (c) (“the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”), and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”).  
 
Applicant has more than $11,000 in delinquent debts. He has not paid them and 
offered no explanation as to why, other than he did not want to reopen them. He has 
been employed steadily since 1997. Therefore, I find (a) and (b) are not applicable. 
After receiving the SOR, Applicant contacted a credit counseling service, but provided 
no proof of any substantive action he has taken to pay or resolve his debts. There is no 
evidence Applicant received counseling to assist him in resolving his financial problems. 
 
5 
 
 
There are no indications the problems are being resolved or that he has initiated a 
good-faith effort to pay his creditors. Applicant has not acted responsibly toward his just 
debts. Some of the debts were sent to collection as far back as 2002 and 2003. 
Applicant was aware of the debts and listed them on his SCA in 2006. Despite being 
aware of the concern, he has not taken action to pay even the smallest debt. I find none 
of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 31 years old and has 
been employed since 1997. He has numerous delinquent debts that date as far back as 
2002. Despite being aware of them he chose for a period of time to do nothing because 
he did not want to reopen them. Recently, he contacted a credit counseling service, but 
did not provide proof that he has actually set up a payment plan or resolved any of his 
debts. Applicant’s irresponsible attitude towards his finances is a cause of concern. I am 
unable to conclude Applicant has successfully mitigated the security concerns raised. 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l.    For Applicant 
   
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
