1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-10158
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on March 15,
2006. On January 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 12, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing through counsel on February 14, 2008, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on March 17, 2008. I
granted Applicant’s request for a delay until April 24, 2008, in order for his counsel to be
available. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 31, 2008, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on April 24, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1
Applicant believed he had an interim clearance in 1991-1992 (Tr. 115).1
2
through 12, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. Applicant also offered the
testimony of three witnesses. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May
5, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 12, 2008, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c and ¶¶ 2.a-2.b of the SOR, with explanations. He
denied that his omission was deliberate. He also provided additional information to
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is 36-years-old. He is divorced with no children. After his high school
graduation in 1991, he attended college. He graduated in 1998 with a bachelor of
science degree. While in college part time, Applicant worked full time for a government
contractor. He has maintained his current employment since 2005. He has held a
security clearance since 1996 (GE 1).1
In July 2002, Applicant was charged with aggressive driving and destruction of
property. Applicant explained that he was driving on the interstate and the driver to his
left moved very close to Applicant’s vehicle forcing Applicant to move to the right and off
the road onto the shoulder. The traffic was heavy on the highway. At one point Applicant
was behind the driver of the other vehicle. Applicant got out of his vehicle and
approached the driver to speak to him. The driver lowered his window and there was a
verbal exchange including a derogatory remark to Applicant. When Applicant was
leaving he put his palm on the driver’s window and leaned on it. This caused the window
to shatter. When this occurred, Applicant called the police. The police arrived at the
scene. Applicant was not arrested or charged with any violation. However, a few days
later, the police contacted Applicant. The police officer gave Applicant a ticket for
aggressive driving and destruction of property. The other party failed to appear in court
and the charges against Applicant were dropped. Applicant offered to pay for the
window and insisted that he did not intentionally break the window (GE 7).
On November 25, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with disobeying a
police officer, fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer with sirens/lights
activated, a felony, and reckless driving. He was found guilty of the second charge
(second degree felony) and sentenced to 18 months supervised probation, fined,
ordered to complete 100 hours of community service, ordered to pay approximately
$473 in court costs, and his license was suspended for one year (GE 4 and 8).
Applicant was visiting a friend for the weekend. They decided to go out
motorcycle riding. Applicant insists that he saw a police car go ahead of him and stop
his friend for speeding. Applicant saw the police officer and took the next exit. He insists
3
that the police were not trying to stop him, nor did the police car have lights or siren
alerting him to stop. Applicant exited the highway and stopped several times. He
eventually followed the signs to the airport. When he reached the airport, police cars
surrounded him. He reports that he was in shock and had no idea that he was being
followed. He also was not sure how fast he was going (Tr. 94) Applicant testified that he
was advised to plead guilty to the felony charge and not risk a trial and the possibility of
jail time (Tr. 99).
Applicant reported this incident to his employer as soon as he returned to work
(Tr. 97). An adverse report was issued on August 22, 2006. Thus, his employer was
fully aware of Applicant’s arrest and his conviction of a felony (GE 2).
Applicant has been driving for almost 20 years. He has no other driving incidents
on his motor vehicle record. In fact, as of April 23, 2008, he has five plus point on his
record which indicates no other incidents and that he has completed a driver
improvement class. (AE D). He no longer drives a motorcycle. He uses cruise control on
his vehicle (Tr. 104). He also has a Certificate of Restoration of Civil Rights for his
felony conviction (AE E).
On Applicant’s March 15, 2006, security clearance application he responded to
Section 23: Your Police Record. He checked “yes” to a. (have you ever been charged
with or convicted of any felony offense?) He disclosed his 2005 conviction and listed it
as a felony. He also wrote a detailed note in the comments section.
Applicant checked “no” to 23 f. (in the last 7 years, have you ever been arrested
for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e,
above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or
drug related.) Applicant did not list the 2002 charge for the aggressive driving that was
ultimately dismissed. He testified credibly that it was an honest oversight. He forgot
about the 2002 incident, and because he was the one who called the police and
reported it and the charges were dismissed, it did not register as an arrest. He felt as if it
never happened (Tr. 151).
Applicant volunteers for a youth program. The youth services coordinator with
whom he works is a police officer. The police officer testified at the hearing for
Applicant. He has known him for three years (AE C). Applicant helps in the explorers
program teaching teenagers to be responsible when having fun. Applicant is
knowledgeable about motorcycles and used that as motivation to help kids learn
lessons through role plays and various scenarios. The police officer found Applicant to
be consistent, articulate and a nice person. He also wants Applicant to help coach
soccer. The police officer believed the traffic incidents were out of character for
Applicant (Tr. 48).     
Applicant’s colleagues testified at the hearing that he is a detail oriented,
responsible individual who follows rules and regulations (Tr. 36). He is described as
4
calm and trustworthy (Tr. 38). Applicant is very professional, amiable, and possesses
good judgment (Tr. 62).
Applicant’s supervisor recommends him. She has known him since 2005. He is a
skilled professional with the ability to provide good and efficient customer support. He is
a good team member and coordinates very well with management and the rest of the
team. He always displays a professional attitude and takes direction from his
management without any problem (AE A). He has recommendations from his
colleagues, his supervisor, and a friend who is an attorney (AE B). Applicant is very
professional in his conduct and work ethic. He is an asset to his current team. He gets
along well with others and has a strong commitment to his job. Applicant is a
conscientious and meticulous worker. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
5
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant’s 2002 charge and arrest for Aggressive driving and Destruction of
Property and the 2005 conviction for fleeing or attempting to elude constitute criminal
activity as envisioned under ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement;
Applicant has had no infractions with the law since 2005. He is described as an
exemplary employee. He has held a clearance with no problems since 1996. He is a
6
volunteer for a youth program. He regrets the incidents. He completed his probation and
the incidents seem out of character for Applicant. Thus, 32(a) and (d) apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
Applicant disclosed the information concerning the felony conviction (2005) on
his 2006 security clearance. He did not check “yes” for 23 f. I find him credible that he
did not think of that since it was in the distant past and the charges had been dropped.
The government did not establish that this was an intentional omission on the part of the
Applicant. If he were trying to hide something, he would not have been so open with his
employer in 2005. Thus, ¶ 16(a) has not been established. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
7
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Applicant has been employed with the government for almost 16 years. During
college he worked part time and full time when his class schedule allowed. He is
recommended for his clearance by his current supervisor. His colleagues describe him
as a careful, calm and responsible person. He has volunteered with a police officer for
a number of years in a youth program. The police officer trusts Applicant and believes
he is a very responsible, trustworthy individual. Applicant regrets what he did in 2002.
However, he called the police because he was upset at what had happened. The
charges were dismissed because the complainant did not appear. 
The 2005 motorcycle incident culminated in a felony conviction for Applicant. He
no longer drives a motorcycle. He has changed his driving habits. His driving record
supports that. He completed his probation. He has never had any difficulty at work with
any situation. He immediately reported this incident to his employer after it happened.
He disclosed information on his 2006 security clearance application in detail concerning
his felony conviction. However, he did not check “yes” to 23 f. concerning any arrests in
the last 7 years. I find him credible in his explanation that he forgot about it in light of the
fact that the charges were dropped and that as far as he was concerned it never
happened. Applicant did not intend to deceive the government. He did not falsify his
2006 application.
Applicant is a loyal and hardworking employee. He was candid at the hearing and
was credible in his testimony that he is not vulnerable to any threats or intimidation that
might jeopardize national security.
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves
me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns
arising from criminal conduct and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
