                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13870 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative Processing (e-
QIP) on November 20, 2006.  On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guidelines F for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
January 4, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 22, 2008.  He denied the 
financial considerations allegation with explanation.  He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  Department counsel was prepared to proceed on January 31, 
2008.  The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 1, 2008, and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
reassigned to me on February 13, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 
19, 2008, for a hearing on April 30, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  The 
government offered four exhibits, marked Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4, 
which were received without objection.  Applicant submitted four documents, marked 
Applicant Exhibits A-D, which were received without objections.  Applicant testified on 
his own behalf.  The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional documents.  
Applicant timely submitted one document, marked Applicant Exhibit E.  The document 
was admitted to the record without objection from Department Counsel.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 9, 2008.  Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 29 years old and has worked for the past three years as an 
electrician in a Navy shipyard.  He now works in the same shipyard on electrical designs 
for ships.  He served almost eight years on active duty in the Navy as an electrician, 
and held a security clearance while on active duty. (Applicant Exhibit A, Discharge Form 
214, dated June 16, 2003)  He was married but is now divorced and he has not re-
married.  There were no children born of the marriage. He receives a thirty percent 
Veteran’s Administration disability as a result of his Navy service. (Tr. 22-24; 
Government Exhibit 1, Electronic Questionnaire for Investigative Processing (e-QIP), 
dated November 30, 2006) 
 
Applicant and his wife divorced in December 2001 when Applicant was on active 
duty.  Applicant took all of his personal items from their home and moved back to his 
ship which was about to deploy.  Applicant’s wife had the divorce papers drafted, and 
he signed them in a car dealer’s parking lot for his wife.  Applicant’s agreement with his 
wife was for him to assume all credit card and furniture debts from the marriage.  His 
wife was to keep their car and to assume payments on the vehicle.  He does not know if 
the payment agreement was in the papers or if it was verbal.   
 
Applicant paid the credit cards debt of about $6,000, and the furniture bill of 
about $2,000.  Credit reports show that the debt for the car is delinquent for $13,162.  
The original purchase price was about $16,522.  Applicant assumes his wife made 
some of the payments.  He did not know the debt was delinquent until he purchased a 
condominium in November 2005, and when he received the SOR in November 2006. 
(Tr. 28-30; Government Exhibit 2, credit report, dated November 30, 2006; See also, 
Government Exhibit 3, Interrogatories, dated October 29, 2007, at 3) 
 
Applicant’s current credit report shows he pays his debts as agreed.  The only 
delinquent debt listed is for the car payment noted above.  (Government Exhibit 3, credit 
report, dated October 12, 2007, at 6-20; Government Exhibit 4, Credit report, dated April 
23, 2008)  Applicant has not been able to contact his wife since 2002.  He requested 
copies of the divorce papers from the courts but only received a copy of a divorce 
 
3 
 
 
decree.  (See, Government Exhibit 3, Interrogatories, dated October 29, 2007, at 5; 
Applicant Exhibit E, e-mail, dated May 28, 2008) 
 
Applicant has not contacted the creditor because he does not believe he should 
pay the debt because of the agreement with his former wife.  He acknowledges co-
signing the loan agreement with his former wife.  Applicant received a loan to purchase 
a condominium in 2005, and a car loan in September 2007. (Tr. 19-32; Applicant Exhibit 
B, Condominium receipt, dated November 10, 2005; Applicant Exhibit C, Loan 
agreement, dated September 7, 2007).  Applicant also has extensive funds in his 
shipyard 401K account.  (Applicant Exhibit D, account statement, dated March 25, 
2008).  Applicant’s personal financial statement shows monthly income of $3,165, with 
monthly expenses of $1,785 leaving monthly discretionary funds of approximately 
$1,100.  This income does not include income from his Veteran’s Administration 
disability.  (Government Exhibit 3, Interrogatories, dated October 29, 2007, at 4).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent car debt is a security concern raising Financial 
Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations),   
 
 Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.  Applicant has one debt that is still 
past due.  Since the debt has not been paid, it casts doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) and it applies.  The debt arose 
from Applicant’s divorce.  He was to pay credit card and furniture bills and his former 
wife was to assume payment of the car debt. Applicant paid his part of the agreement 
 
5 
 
 
showing that he acted responsibly.  It was his wife that did not fulfill her part of the 
agreement.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  Applicant does not believe he 
has an obligation to pay the debt.  He has not made any arrangements to pay the debt 
so the mitigating condition does not apply.   
 
 Since Applicant signed the loan agreement with his wife for the car, he does 
have a legal obligation to pay the debt.  Even though he does have a legal obligation for 
the debt, this obligation may not result in a security concern.  There is a security 
concern for a failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations.  Applicant has shown he is living within his means, that he satisfies 
his debts, and that he meets his financial obligations.  He has a reasonable objection to 
paying a debt that should be paid by his wife.  He may have a legal obligation to pay the 
debt but his failure to pay it under the circumstances does not show he is not living 
within his means, that he does not satisfy his debts, and does not meet his financial 
obligations.  His refusal to pay the car debt does not show that he has poor self-control, 
that he lacks judgment, or that he has an unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations.  His financial information shows that he is not financially overextended and 
that he is not at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  His refusal to 
pay the debt under the circumstances does not show he is financially irresponsible, and 
does not raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Applicant has presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
 “Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light 
of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant’s 
almost eight years of active duty in the Navy during which he successfully held a 
security clearance.  I considered that his one financial issue was caused by his wife’s 
 
6 
 
 
failure to pay a car loan that she was obligated to pay by her divorce from Applicant.  I 
considered that Applicant’s other financial obligations are paid as agreed, that he has 
been granted loans from other financial institutions, and he has a positive balance in his 
retirement account.  He manages his finances in a manner that does not create a 
security concern.  Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
