 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-14064 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on March 12, 2007. On 
January 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 17, 2008; answered it on 
February 5, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on February 7, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on February 20, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on March 7, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 24, 2008, and an amended notice of hearing 
on March 27, 2008, setting the hearing for April 23, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the 
record open until May 7, 2008, but he did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 1, 2008. The record closed on May 7, 
2008. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  I 
make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old explosives truck driver employed by a defense 
contractor. He has two years of college but no degree (Tr. 7). He has worked for his 
current employer for more than 30 years (Tr. 29). He has never been married and is not 
legally responsible for supporting anyone but himself. He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 In the early 2000s, Applicant started accumulating delinquent credit card debt.  
As of the date of the SOR, he had 13 delinquent debts totaling more than $85,000. The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are the same debt, as are the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m. The duplicate debts are not included in the above totals. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when he was injured on the job and 
disabled for about six weeks. As a result of his injury, he could no longer work 50-55 
hours per week, and the loss of overtime pay left him financially overextended (Tr. 37).  
He could not recall the date of his injury, but he remembered it was before he began 
working as an explosives truck driver in April 2002 (Tr. 35). 
 
 In a personal financial statement submitted in response to DOHA interrogatories 
on December 10, 2007, Applicant reported net monthly income of $2,084, monthly 
expenses of $1,160, debt payments of $715, and a net remainder of $208 (GX 2at 5). At 
the hearing, he testified his net monthly income was about $2,100, expenses were 
about $1,530, and the remainder was about $500 minus the cost of gasoline for 
commuting (Tr. 45-50). 
 
 Applicant testified he thought the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a had been resolved 
with an agreement to pay $160 per month (Tr. 38, 48-49). He had no documentation of 
this resolution at the hearing and did not provide anything during the time allowed for 
post-hearing submissions. He has not made any payments on the other debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
 Applicant contacted a credit counseling agency at one time, but did not follow up 
after the first interview (Tr. 52).  He does not have a budget or a specific plan to resolve 
his financial situation, which he characterizes as a mess (Tr. 29, 53). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . 
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person 
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information.  This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-
0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 
4 
 
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling more almost $89,000. The debts 
alleged in SOR 1.d and 1.l duplicate other debts alleged in the SOR. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
and 1.l. in Applicant=s favor. The remaining 13 delinquent debts total more than 
$85,000. 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history 
of not meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ 
Applicant’s financial history raises these three disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). The first prong (“so 
 
5 
 
 
long ago”) is not established because his delinquent debts remain unresolved. The 
second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established because his debts are so numerous. 
The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is not established because Applicant is financially 
overextended and has no plan to right his financial ship.  Finally, his financial history 
raises doubts about his good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s brief period 
of disability and his inability to work overtime were conditions beyond his control. 
However, he has done nothing to adjust his lifestyle to his income and virtually nothing 
to settle, compromise, or otherwise resolve his debts. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has not received counseling of any type, and his financial problems are not under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant testified he thought he had resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but he provided no 
documentation even after being given two weeks after the hearing to provide it.  He 
admitted he had done nothing to resolve the remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. He presented himself as articulate and intelligent, but 
he appears to be drifting through life. He has neglected his financial obligations for 
years. He has no concrete plan for resolving his situation. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.k, and 1.m-1.o: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
