 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14151
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference security concern that existed in this case.
On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns
under Guideline C (foreign preference). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR,
signed by her on March 14, 2008, in which she admitted all SOR allegations and requested
a clearance decision based on the written record without a hearing.  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 9, 2008,
that was mailed to Applicant on April 14, 2008, and received by her on April 16, 2008.
Applicant was informed she had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit her
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 A questionnaire for sensitive positions submitted by Applicant in March 2007 (Ex. 4), lists Applicant’s2
mother’s citizenship as being Mexican, but also includes the date of 08/27/1984 as the citizenship date,
provides a citizenship certificate number, and then goes on to describe the document as alien registration.
2
objections to information contained in the FORM or submit any material she wished to be
considered. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM or object to anything
contained in the FORM within the time allowed her. The case was assigned to me on May
27, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings
of fact:
Applicant is a 45-year-old woman who has been employed by a defense contractor
since January 2002, currently as a property management administrator. She was
previously employed in private industry as an electronic inspector from February 1998 to
December 2001, as a quality inspector for the same company through a temporary agency
from January 1998 to February 1998, and as a quality clerk by a different company from
May 1994 to January 1998. 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth, having been born in a city very near her current
residence in January 1963. Applicant’s mother was born in Mexico and either became a
U.S. citizen in August 1984 or obtained resident alien status at that time.  Her mother2
resides in the United States near where Applicant lives. 
Applicant possesses a U.S. passport that was last issued in June 2001. She has
resided in the same residence since January 1994. She attended a vocational school from
January 2005 to October 2005, and a real estate school from December 2006 to February
2007, in order to obtain a real estate license. She currently has a conditional real estate
license and is required to successfully complete two additional classes to obtain a full
license. 
Applicant was first married in January 1979. That marriage ended in divorce in
October 2000. Her husband was born in Mexico, but at some undisclosed time became a
U.S. citizen. Applicant has a 26-year-old son, a 25-year-old son, and a 22-year-old
daughter who were born during this marriage. Applicant’s daughter resides with her. Her
younger son lives nearby, while her oldest son is serving on active duty with the U.S. Army
and living in another state. 
Applicant has been remarried since October 2003. Her husband was born in Mexico
in 1952, but became a U.S. citizen in November 1977. His father was a citizen of Mexico
but is now deceased. His mother became a U.S. citizen in September 1996, and currently
lives near Applicant’s place of residence. 
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
3
Applicant visited Mexico for approximately three days in March 1999, and for about
one week in October 2003. She lives a short distance from the U.S. - Mexican border and
reports she has made many one-day trips to Mexico during the past seven years. 
Sometime in approximately 2001, Applicant applied for Mexican citizenship by
submitting an application at the Mexican consulate near her US. residence. She did so
solely because she was required to be a citizen of Mexico in order to purchase real estate
in Mexico and she and her husband were contemplating buying property in Mexico on
which they could build a vacation home. Her application for Mexican citizenship was
approved about two months after she applied. 
In April 2003, Applicant and her husband paid $7,000 for a vacant parcel of land in
Mexico. She estimates it is now valued at $15,000. She and her husband hope to
eventually build a vacation home on this parcel of land but currently use it as a place to
park a recreational vehicle when on vacation. They used money from their savings to pay
for the land and do not rely on the land for income. Applicant applied for voting rights in
Mexico to secure her ownership of the land and to obtain some kind of identification card
to prove her Mexican citizenship. She has not actually voted in any Mexican election. 
Applicant has not otherwise exercised any right of Mexican citizenship. She does
not have any relatives living in Mexico and does not have any contact with foreign nationals
other than when she vacations in Mexico. She asserts her sole loyalty is to the United
States and she is willing to renounce her Mexican citizenship if it is a condition of her
obtaining a security clearance. 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline C (foreign preference),
with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Foreign preference is a concern because when an individual acts in such a way as
to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the
United States.
Applicant applied for and received Mexican citizenship and the right to vote in
Mexican elections. She applied for that citizenship and the right to vote so she could
purchase vacation property in Mexico and to obtain identification that would identify her as
a Mexican citizen. Additionally, she has purchased and presently owns a parcel of vacant
land in Mexico that is valued at about $15,000. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 10(a):
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited
to: (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits
from a foreign country; . . . (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests in another country; and 10(b): action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign
citizenship by an American citizen apply. 
5
Applicant’s sole reason for obtaining Mexican citizenship and securing a right to vote
in Mexican elections was to facilitate the purchase of a small parcel of land on which she
and her husband hope to eventually build a vacation home. She has resided in the U.S.
her entire life and lived in the same residence for the past 14 years. Applicant raised three
children in this country who are all U.S. citizens and residents. Her oldest son is serving
in the armed forces of the United States. All of her relatives are U.S. citizens and/or
residents. She has no other contact with foreign nationals or Mexico other than as a
vacation site. She has attended formal schooling in her state of residence to obtain a real
estate license in that state.   
There is no record evidence to indicate Applicant has a “preference” for Mexico over
the United States or that she has any interest in Mexico other than as a personally
desirable vacation spot. That vacation interest is one she shares with thousands if not
millions of her fellow U.S. citizens. Applicant did not obtain Mexican citizenship as a display
of preference for that country but rather to facilitate long-term vacation plans for her and
her husband. She clearly demonstrated her allegiance to the U.S., and her lack of interest
in Mexico as anything other than a vacation site, by expressing her willingness to renounce
her Mexican citizenship. Mitigating Condition (MC) 11(b) the individual has expressed a
willingness to renounce dual citizenship applies.
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” There is absolutely no reason to doubt that Applicant is a loyal
American citizen or suspect she would ever consider doing harm to the interests of the
United States.
 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, those facts discussed above,
and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has mitigated the
foreign preference security concern that existed in this case. She has overcome the case
against her and satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline C is decided for
Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-c: For Applicant
6
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
