                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12820 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Edmonds, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on February 14, 2007.  On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
Applicant under Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 7, 2007. She 
answered the SOR in writing on November 18, 2007, admitting all of the factual 
allegations in the SOR with explanation.  She requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  Department counsel was prepared to proceed on February 25, 
2008, and I was assigned the case on February 27, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 6, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 8, 2008.  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The government offered one exhibit, marked Government Exhibit 1, which was received 
without objection.  Applicant submitted seven exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits A 
through G, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on her behalf.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 17, 2008.  Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Dismissal 
 
 Department Counsel request that SOR allegation 1.a. and 1.e be dismissed to 
conform to the government’s evidence.  Applicant had no objection.  The motion was 
granted and SOR allegation 1.a. and 1.e. were dismissed. (Tr. 6-7) 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request for administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Taiwan. (Tr. 11-12)  The request and the supporting documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I.  
Applicant had no objection to the request for administrative notice and the attached 
documents.  The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanation.  She also provided additional information to support her request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 53 years old and has been employed as a principal engineer for a 
defense contractor since 1995.  Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan and received 
her undergraduate degree in mathematics from a Taiwan university in 1978.  She came 
to the United States and received her master’s degree and doctorate in electrical 
engineering from United States universities.  Immediately after receiving her doctorate, 
she started working for her defense contractor employer. She has held a security 
clearance since 1996.  She has been separated from her husband since 1997.  She has 
two children who were born in the United States and are United States citizens.  One is 
a college graduate and the other a high school student.  She became a United States 
citizen in 1990 and received a United States passport.  She turned in her Taiwan 
passport to her facilities security officer and it was destroyed. (Tr. 16-20; Government 
Exhibit 1, Security Clearance Application, E-QIP, dated February 14, 2007)   
 
Applicant’s mother is a resident and citizen of Taiwan.  She is 77 years old and a 
retired translator for a Japanese company.  Her father is deceased.  Her mother 
receives no funds or benefits, medical or otherwise, from the Taiwan government.  Her 
 
3 
 
 
mother has visited her in the United States about five times in the last ten years.  She 
talks to her by telephone about once a week and sometimes more often. (Tr. 21-22), 
 
Applicant’s mother lives with her 49 year old brother, his wife and daughter, who 
are citizens and residents of Taiwan.  Applicant’s brother is a doctor in a hospital and 
his wife is at home.  She talks to her brother or his wife if they are home and answer the 
telephone when she calls her mother.  Her sister-in-law and niece visited her in the 
United States in 2004. (Tr. 22-25) 
 
Applicant’s sister is a 46-year-old physical therapist professor at a Taiwanese 
university.  The sister received her physical therapy doctorate at a United States 
university.  She is married with one daughter.  Her husband is also a physical therapist 
by profession but is now serving as a delegate to a local city government.  She speaks 
to her sister by telephone about once every two months.  She does not talk to her 
brother-in-law because he usually is busy and not home when she calls her sister. (Tr. 
25-26) 
 
She has another sister who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan.  This sister is a 
doctor of internal medicine.  Her husband is also a citizen and resident of Taiwan and is 
also a doctor.  Applicant talks to this sister about every two months.  The sister visited 
Applicant once in the United States when she accompanied their mother on a trip.  (Tr. 
26-29) 
 
Applicant’s aunt and uncle were born in Taiwan but have lived in Japan for over 
45 years.  Her uncle is a doctor in Japan.  She only met them when they all attended 
her grandmother’s funeral a few years ago.  They have never visited her in the United 
States and she never talks to them. (Tr. 29-31) 
 
Applicant’s family does not know she has a security clearance.  She only has a 
United States passport and uses it for her visits to Taiwan.  Applicant visited her family 
in Taiwan from December 2000 until January 2001 with her two children.  She returned 
for another visit in August 2001 because her father was ill.  She returned in September 
2001 when her father passed away.  Her next trip was in April 2004 to attend her 
grandmother’s funeral.  Her last trip was in December 2006 when her mother suffered a 
stroke.  She only traveled to Taiwan to visit her mother, attend funerals of relatives, or to 
see a sick family member.  (Tr. 19-21) 
 
Applicant owns her house in the United States.  She has a retirement account 
with her employer.  She does not own property or have investments in Taiwan.  (Tr. 31-
33)   
 
Applicant is a valued employee of the defense contractor.  She presented her 
performance evaluations for 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007.  She has been 
uniformly rated as meeting or exceeding expectations.  (Applicant exhibits B, C, D, E, F, 
Performance Appraisals, various dates)  Her direct supervisor noted he has worked with 
Applicant since 2005.  She is professional in work and conduct and enjoyable to work 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
with.  She is a highly skilled engineer who contributes to success on their projects.  He 
has not observed any conflict between her actions and her holding a security clearance. 
(Applicant Exhibit A, Letter, dated April 1, 2008). 
 
 During World War II and after, a civil war was fought on the mainland of China 
between the Chinese Communist Party and the Nationalist Chinese.  In 1949, the 
Chinese Communist Party was victorious and established a government on the 
mainland.  The Nationalist Chinese fled to Taiwan and established a government.  
Taiwan has developed steadily since then and is now the world’s 17th largest economy.  
Taiwan became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2002, further expanding 
its trade opportunities and further strengthening its standing in the global economy.  
This prosperity established economic and social stability.   
 
 Until 1986, Taiwan's political system was effectively controlled by one party, the 
Kuomintang.  Since ending martial law in 1987, Taiwan has taken dramatic steps to 
improve respect for human rights and create a democratic political system. The United 
States has been committed to maintaining cultural, commercial, and other nonofficial 
relations with Taiwan since January 1979, when it formally recognized the government 
of the People's Republic of China (PRC) as the sole legal government of China. By 
formal act of Congress (Taiwan Relations Act of 1979), the United States is committed 
to provide Taiwan with military defensive arms in support of Taiwan's security and 
stability in the region.  The United States also stated it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of Taiwan.  Despite the United 
States clear and consistent position that Taiwan and the mainland are part of one 
China, United States commercial ties have expanded with Taiwan and the United States 
is supportive of Taiwan's membership in international organizations, such as the World 
Trade Organization and the Asian Development Bank.  (See Hearing Exhibits, United 
States, Department of State's Background Note: Taiwan, dated October 2007.)   
 
While still pursuing a closer relationship with Taiwan, the official United States 
position on Taiwan and mainland China seems to be a criticism of mainland China’s 
buildup opposite Taiwan with periodic cautions and warnings to the effect that United 
States support for Taiwan is not unconditional, but has limits.  Smooth United States 
and PRC relations are an important tool in cooperating against terrorism and 
maintaining stability in Pacific region.  Faced with competing pressures and the 
continuing transformation on both the PRC and Taiwan systems, the United States 
government may be facing new and more difficult policy choices concerning Taiwan in 
the next few years. (See Hearing Exhibits, Congressional Research Service Report to 
Congress: Taiwan: Recent Developments and U.S. Policy Choices, dated October 9, 
2006) 
 
The government claims through Administrative Notice that Taiwan poses a threat 
to national security because, in the past, it was one of the countries most actively 
engaged in industrial espionage and the collection of foreign economic information.1  It 
1 See, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage.  While the 
report is undated, the government’s request for administrative notice refers to the document as a 2000 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
presented information concerning individuals in the United States convicted of engaging 
in espionage practices with Taiwanese companies or officials.  It is also noted that 
Taiwan has a democratic political system, has made dramatic steps toward improving 
its respect for human rights, has ended restrictions on freedom of the press and the 
formation of new political parties, and has relaxed restrictions on personal freedoms. 
(See, United States State Department Background Notes, Taiwan, dated April 2007; 
United States Department of State, Country Report on Human Rights Practices-2006, 
China (Taiwan Only) dated March 6, 2007).  The relationship between the United States 
and Taiwan is defined in the Taiwan Relations Act which recognizes Taiwan. (Public 
Law 96-8)  Taiwan has a long history of friendly relations with the United States, 
including substantial levels of foreign trade.  Taiwan is an ally and friend but also poses 
a security threat because of efforts to obtain national security information.  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
report.  There are a number of examples in this report of espionage on U.S. economic and industrial 
activities by Taiwanese officials or companies. Also of note is a Private Industry Survey by officials of the 
National Counterintelligence Center listing Taiwan as one of the most active collectors of economic and 
industrial espionage. The list of most active collectors was developed by contacting nearly a dozen 
selected Fortune 500 companies for their view of the problem of foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage. Only a small sampling, 12 of 500, of companies were contacted. The companies 
and individuals contacted are not identified.  The report was given minimal weight. 
 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 There is a security concern because foreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interests.  Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity 
of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including but not limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known 
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6) 
 
 Applicant has contact through visits and telephone calls with her mother, brother, 
two sisters, sister-in-law, and brothers-in-law, who are all citizens and residents of 
Taiwan.  She has contact with an aunt and uncle who are Taiwan citizens that reside in 
Japan.  These contacts raise security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying 
Conditions (FI DC) AG ¶ 79(a) (Contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion); and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) (Connections to a foreign 
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information).  Each individual contact by itself may not create a heightened risk of 
 
7 
 
 
foreign influence, but the totality of the contacts may indicate a heightened risk of 
foreign influence. 
 
 I have considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature 
of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of 
the U.S.); AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest; and AG ¶ 8(c) (Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so 
casual or infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could created a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation) and determine all apply to Applicant’s circumstances. 
 
 Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  The Appeal board consistently 
applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that its underlying premise was that 
an applicant should not be placed in a position where he is forced to make a choice 
between the interest of the family member and the interest of the United States.  (See, 
ISCR Case No. 03-17620, App. Bd, Apr. 17, 2006; ISCR Case No. 03-24933, App. Bd. 
Jul. 28, 2005; ISCR Case No. 03-02382, App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005; and ISCR Case No. 
03-15205, App. Bd. Jan. 21. 2005).  Thus, an administrative judge was not permitted to 
apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the new 
guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to determine if 
an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 In determining if Applicant’s family in Taiwan cause security concerns, I 
considered that Taiwan is an ally of the United States, has a defense agreement with 
the United States, and is one of the United States’ substantial trading partners.  I 
considered that Taiwan improved its human rights position and its people enjoy basic 
freedoms.  While the United States has a one-China policy, the United States does 
maintain cultural, commercial, and other ties with Taiwan.  I considered that Taiwan 
does engage in economic and other types of espionage, and there are instances of 
Taiwan officials and companies engaging in such espionage with individuals in the 
United States.  There are no indications in these instances Taiwan was targeting United 
States citizens to provide economic or other sensitive information.  I also considered 
that faced with new and competing national interest, the United States policy toward 
Taiwan could change.  While Taiwan is a country that is friendly to the United Stares, it 
could engage in espionage against United States interests.  Friendly countries may 
have profound disagreements with the United States or have engaged in espionage 
against United States economic, scientific, or technical interest.  A friendly relationship 
is not determinative, but it makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt 
to exploit a United States citizen through relatives or associates in that country.  Taiwan 
 
8 
 
 
is not a hostile country, nor is its interests inimical to the United States.  The United 
States and Taiwan are large democracies, enjoy good relations, and are trading 
partners.  It is reasonable to consider that Taiwan would not take any action to 
jeopardize their friendly position with the United States because of their need for trade 
and defense assistance from the United States.  It would be considered an act 
unfriendly to the interest of the United States to coerce its citizens with relatives in the 
United States to pressure their United States relatives to provide economic or other 
espionage information against the interest of the United States.  While none of the 
considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to be considered 
in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion from his family members 
in Taiwan. 
 
 Applicant has raised Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) ¶ 8(a) (the 
nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of 
the United States).  Applicant’s mother is a retired translator for a company and has no 
ties to the Taiwanese government.  She is not dependent on the government for 
subsistence.  Applicant’s siblings are medical professionals working for private 
businesses in Taiwan.  They are not dependent on the Taiwanese government for their 
subsistence.  Applicant talks to her mother frequently, at least once a week.  She talks 
to her siblings less but it is still often at about every other month.  Applicant made a 
number of trips to Taiwan for normal visits to her family, or when they are sick, or for 
funerals.  Her mother and siblings have come to the United States to visit her.  It is clear 
that they have a close family relationship.  Her contact with her immediate family is 
frequent and not casual.  Applicant has little if any contact with her brother-in-law, who 
is a government official.  Since the contact is so minimal, his position as a government 
official does not create a security concern.  Applicant’s information concerning her 
family members’ living conditions, life style, and professions, shows it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his family and 
friend and the interests of the United States.  Applicant established her family members 
in Taiwan are ordinary citizens leading normal lives.  They do not present a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  The 
positions and activities of her family and the fact they are in Taiwan show that it is 
unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of being coerced or pressured to 
choose between these people and her interests in protecting the national security of the 
United States.  FI MC ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant has raised FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest either because 
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, 
or country is minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest).  Applicant’s vulnerability to duress is also 
important.  Applicant has been in the United States for over 23 years, and a United 
States citizen for over 18 years.  She has two children born and educated in the United 
 
9 
 
 
States, who are citizens of the United States.  Applicant’s assets, her house and 
retirement funds are in the United States and she has no financial interest in Taiwan.  
She has held a security clearance for over 13 years without any problems.  Applicant’s 
numerous and repeated trips to Taiwan were solely for the purpose of visiting family.  
Applicant has demonstrated that she is not unusually vulnerable to duress. Applicant 
has a normal sense of loyalty or obligation to her family in Taiwan.  But she also has 
long standing relationship and connections in the United States.  She has demonstrated 
that these relationships will lead her to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States.  FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant has raised FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation) in connection to her aunt and uncle in Japan.  
Applicant has the burden of presenting information to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns raised by the government.  Applicant has only met her aunt and uncle 
one time at the funeral of her grandmother.  At best, this is only minimal contact and she 
hardly knows them.  The contact is so casual and infrequent there is little likelihood that 
it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  Because of the lack of a 
relationship with her aunt and uncle, there is no reason to discuss the security 
significance of the nature of the relationship between Japan and the United States.  
Accordingly, FI MC 8(c) applies to her aunt and uncle in Japan.   
 
 Accordingly, Applicant has met her heavy burden to show that her family 
contacts in Taiwan and Japan do not cause a security concern.  I conclude FI MC AGs 
¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The “whole person” concept 
requires consideration of all available information about Applicant, not a single item in 
isolation, to reach a common sense determination concerning Applicant’s security 
 
10 
 
 
worthiness.  Applicant’s family in Taiwan both individually and collectively are in 
positions and circumstances that make it unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position 
to choose between the interests of her family and the interest of the United States, or 
that she can be exploited, pressured, or coerced because of them.  Her contacts with 
her family in Taiwan are strong but they do not create a conflict of interest between the 
family members and her loyalty to the United States.  Applicant has been in the United 
States for over 28 years and a citizen of the United States for over 18 years.  Her 
children were born here and are United States citizens.  She has accumulated 
significant assets in the United States, and has no property interests in Taiwan.  Her 
supervisor and her employer consider her to be a good worker and not a security risk.  
She has successfully held a security clearance for over 13 years.  She does not discuss 
her work with her family in Taiwan.  She travels to Taiwan periodically to visit family 
rather than any connection to the Taiwanese government.  She established that her 
contacts with her family in Taiwan and Japan do not indicate a security risk.  Applicant’s 
life story is an example of the success of many immigrants to the United States.  She 
came to the United States to better herself through education.  She remained here and 
became a United States citizen.  The family enjoys a typical United States life style.  
Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
