                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11504
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
May 16, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On December 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 2, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 7, 2008. Applicant filed a
response to the FORM on March 14, 2008. The case was assigned to me on March 27,
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant was indebted to a police department on an account placed for
collection in 1999. He satisfied the debt in February 2008.
Applicant is indebted to United Airlines Employees Credit in the approximate
amount of $610.00. This debt was placed for collection in 2000. In his response to the
FORM, applicant stated he “connected” with the collection agency and they had no
record of his name or social security number. He further stated he is “trying to do some
research in order to satisfy debt.”
Applicant is indebted to Wachovia Bank in the approximate amount of
$11,611.00 as a result of a student loan he defaulted on that was subsequently charged
off in 2004. In his response to the FORM, applicant stated the debt is now with a
collection agency (ACT) and that he “was able to arrange a $231.00 monthly payment
with ACT after making a $1,000.00 down payment.” He further stated that the monthly
payments begin on March 28, 2008. He attached to his FORM response two letters
from ACT establishing they received two $500.00 post dated checks from applicant in
February 2008.
Applicant is indebted to British Petroleum in the approximate amount of $108.00
on an account that was placed for collection in January 2005. In his response to the
FORM, applicant stated, “Account paid in full, still waiting for a copy of the statement.”
Applicant was indebted to Cingular Wireless in the approximate amount of
$1,307.00. In March 2005, this debt was placed with Cavalry for collection. Applicant
recently satisfied the debt.
Applicant was indebted to TCF National Bank in the approximate amount of
$626.00 on an account referred to AMR and then to ACC for collection. This debt was
satisfied by applicant on December 27, 2007.
Applicant is indebted to ARS in the approximate amount of $726.00 for a debt
referred to it for collection by US Cellular in 2006.
A Personal Financial Statement dated September 25, 2007 indicates applicant
had a positive monthly cash flow of approximately $1,382.00.
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaire for national security positions
(EQNSP) in January 2006. In response to two questions on the EQNSP, applicant
denied that (1) in the prior seven years he had been over 180 days delinquent on any
debt and (2) he was then over 90 days delinquent on any debts. As documented above,
applicant was well over 180 days delinquent on many debts when he completed the
EQNSP. In his response to the SOR, applicant explained his denials by stating he was
not aware of these debts until he was interviewed by an investigator in February 2007.
Applicant’s explanation for his denials is not credible. It is simply unbelievable that he
3
would not have recalled any of these delinquent debts, particularly his large student
loan debt, when he completed the EQNSP.
A letter from applicant’s immediate supervisor during the past two years was
attached to applicant’s SOR response. In it, the supervisor stated that applicant has
been a “stellar” performer who is “simply the best employee” she has.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a long history of an inability
or unwillingness to pay his debts. Accordingly, these disqualifying conditions are
applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph 20.a. may apply
where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Although applicant has made
some progress dealing with his delinquent debt, his failure to honor his financial
obligations is both recent and frequent. Furthermore, having been provided no credible
evidence explaining the circumstances leading up to his financial irresponsibility, it is
impossible to conclude his financial irresponsibility will not recur. Accordingly, this
mitigation condition is not applicable.
Under Paragraph 20.b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
presented no credible evidence that would justify application of this mitigating condition.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph 20.c. This mitigation condition does not apply.
Paragraph 20.d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant
provided proof that he satisfied three of the seven debts alleged in the SOR, and stated
he paid a fourth and is waiting for a “copy of the statement.” He also stated that he
worked out a payment agreement with his largest creditor, ACT, requiring him to make a
$1,000.00 deposit and then $231.00 monthly payments. Although he did not provide a
copy of the agreement, he did provide proof that he sent ACT the $1,000.00 deposit. As
5
to the other two debts, he stated he is trying to make contact with the creditors. Overall,
his efforts evince a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his debts.
Accordingly, this mitigating condition applies.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant intentionally provided false,
material information on an EQNSP.
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I
considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who has
a history of not meeting his financial obligations. In addition, he lied to the Government
in January 2006 when he, in essence, denied any delinquent debt. Applicant’s inability
or unwillingness to honor his financial obligations and to be truthful about them is
6
serious and recent. His failure to explain why he did not honor his financial obligations,
and his incredible denial of an intent to deceive the Government about his financial
condition, preclude a finding that applicant’s financial difficulties will not recur and that
applicant is unlikely to provide false information to the Government in the future. Based
on the foregoing, I conclude applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising
from Guidelines E and F.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
