1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-11814
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                               
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be granted.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on December
22, 2006. On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 7, 2007. She
answered the SOR in writing on December 13, 2007. DOHA received the request on
Responses to SOR; Tr. 46-48.1
2
December 20, 2007. She requested a hearing before an administrative judge on
January 12, 2008, which DOHA received on January 17, 2008. Department Counsel
was prepared to proceed on January 23, 2008, and this case was assigned to another
administrative judge on January 25, 2008. Because of workload adjustments, this case
was reassigned to me on March 4, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March
19, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 10, 2008. The government
offered four exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She submitted 11 exhibits (AE)
A through K. Except for AE D, all were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. AE D would be admitted provided Applicant provided an additional document.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 18, 2008. I held the record
open for Applicant to submit additional matters.  She submitted AE L-N and the
additional document for AE D. Department Counsel responded to these submissions on
May 8, 2008, which were received and admitted without objection. The record closed on
May 8, 2008.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
At the hearing, I discussed Applicant’s receipt of the hearing notice on April 1,
2008, less than 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 9.) I advised Applicant of her right
under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice. (Id.) 
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n,
alleging additional debts owed by Applicant. (Tr. at 10-11.) Applicant did not object to
the motion, which was granted. (Id.)
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated December 13, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.k of the SOR, with explanations. She
denied the remaining factual allegations in the SOR. She also provided additional
information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. Her discussions
regarding allegations 1.m and 1.n at the hearing are treated as admissions of the debts.
(Tr. 10-12.) At the hearing, Department Counsel agreed that the allegations in ¶ 1.a and
1.d of the SOR are the same debt. 1
GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application, dated December 22, 2006) at 1, 6; Tr. 18-20, 118.2
Tr. 20-21, 23.3
Tr. 24, 60-82, 113.4
GE 3 (Credit report, dated February 6, 2007); GE 4 (Credit report, dated January 23, 2008); AE A (Copy of5
bank statement); AE B (February 11, 2008 letter showing final car payment); AE C (Bank statement); Tr. 21-
22, 24-26, 79, 81-82, 84, 86, 89-90, 92, 118.
3
Applicant is 50 years old. She works as a trainer for a Department of Defense
contractor, a part-time position she has held for three years. The same employer hired
her to work another position, which requires a security clearance. With the denial of her
clearance, she is unable to work this second position.2
In 1982, Applicant entered into a long-term relationship with a man she never
married. She ended this relationship in 2000. She has three children from this
relationship, ages 23, 17, and 11, who still live at home. The oldest, a daughter, attends
college and works part-time.3
During the long tenure of the above relationship, Applicant and her significant
other purchased and paid for two trailers, where they lived. Most of the time, she placed
the trailers on rural land she owned jointly with her mother, who lived nearby. They also
purchased and paid for motor vehicles and held joint bank accounts. They had credit
cards and other credit. They made the required payments. During this relationship,
Applicant work full-time or part-time periodically. She worked when her mother could
babysit the children. Her significant other worked intermittently, but never on a
continuous basis and was not a reliable babysitter. She received no employment related
benefits during this relationship. Her significant other liked to apply for and obtain credit
cards, in his name and in her name without her knowledge, which began to cause
issues with increased debt. Towards the end of the relationship, credit card debts
mounted and past efforts to maintain the credit card payments were abandoned
because of sporadic income.       4
Applicant ended this relationship in 2000 because of debt issues and his
infidelity. She immediately closed the joint bank accounts. After her gall bladder surgery,
she found employment and has worked steadily since 2000. She has not spoken with
her significant other since 2002. She currently works at a fast food restaurant and part-
time with a government contractor in a non-clearance position. She completed an
associates degree in Applied Science in 2005 and incurred no unpaid debt for her
education. She bought a larger modular home for she and her children because they
needed new housing. She timely pays her loan on this property. Because public
transportation is not available to her, she bought and paid for two cars in the last seven
years. She paid the remaining balance on her most recent car loan with her 2007 tax
refund. She opened credit card accounts in her own name in the last three years. She
timely meets her monthly payments on these cards. Through these efforts, she re-
established her commercial credit worthiness.  5
GE 3, supra note 5; GE 4 supra note 5, at 3; Tr. 49-50.6
AE A (Copy of bank statement, dated February 14, 2008 through March 13, 2008) at 2; AE C (Copy of bank7
statement, dated January 16, 2008 to February 14, 2008) at 1; Tr. 53-60.
4
Applicant currently earns $7.50 an hour at the fast food restaurant. She works as
many hours as the restaurant will give her, usually between 32 and 40 hours a week.
Her gross earnings through March 15, 2008 totaled $2,600, and her net income totaled
$2,320. She works, on average, 10 days every six weeks for the Department of Defense
contractor, earning $12.50 an hour. Her gross income from this job, as of the hearing
date, totaled $1,936 and her net pay totaled $1,800. Her monthly expenses include a
mortgage of $432, utilities of $80, car insurance of $110, $400 for food, $62 for
telephone, $80 for gasoline, $48 for Direct TV, and $40 for credit cards for a total of
$1,252. She does not receive any child support for her children. Her current income
provides enough to pay her monthly living expenses.
With the exception of the two debts listed in ¶ 1.m and 1.n of the SOR,
Applicant’s unpaid debts occurred when her long-term relationship ended. She
attempted to pay the debts, but between July 2001 and January 2002, she defaulted on
the credit card debts, as she received no financial assistance from her significant other
who had created much of the debt problem. In her response to the SOR, she denied
many of the debts because she did not recognize the listed creditor. At the hearing, she
acknowledged several debts after the original creditor was identified. She disagrees with
the total amount she owes. Her January 23, 2008 credit report reflects she challenged
the validity of the $1,023 (SOR ¶ 1.a, a debt she does not recognize) and $2,198 (SOR
¶ 1.c.) debts. Contrary to the SOR allegation in ¶ 1.h, the February 6, 2007 credit report
indicates this account has a zero balance and a high credit of $1,234, not an unpaid
balance of $1,234, and the account was transferred to recovery. The record does not
indicated which creditor now holds this account and Applicant does not recognize the
account.6
Applicant paid the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.m., which arose over a dispute with the
creditor over service not performed. The $57 debt in SOR ¶ 1.n. relates to collect long-
distances telephone charges from Mexico made to her home telephone when no one
was at home. She spoke by telephone with her long-distance carrier about the charges
on several occasions. Her calls lead to the removal of one call, but not the other calls.
She cancelled her service with this long-distance telephone carrier, which is not the
listed creditor. The actual bill is listed as a debt to her local telephone carrier because
the long-distance carrier’s bill is included in the local telephone carrier’s bill. She
continues her telephone service with the telephone carrier identified as the creditor and
regularly pays her bill.7
Applicant enjoys her work as a trainer. Her employer describes her trainer skills
as valuable because she demonstrates remarkable adaption skills in her various trainer
roles. Former employers provide very favorable recommendations on her work skills
and ethics, as do friends and former professors. When she learned that she would be
AE E through AE J; Tr. 22.8
5
unable to do the security segment of her trainer job, she found other employment which
enables her to provide her family with basic necessities including food and housing.8
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Towards the end of her long-term relationship, Applicant and her
significant other accumulated delinquent credit card debt. She attempted to pay the
debt, but eventually defaulted on the obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial problems began to increase significantly toward the end of the 1990s, when
her then significant other continued to obtain credit cards in both their individual names.
After she ended this relationship, she attempted to continue with the debt payments, but
could not do so. She defaulted on the credit card debts between about July 2001 and
January 2002. Since that time, she has always paid the mortgage on her home and her
car payments. She remains current on her existing credit card debts and does not have
new, unpaid debt. She has not had any contact with her significant other for six years
and he is no longer a part of her life. The credit problems created by his actions are not
likely to reoccur. This mitigating condition applies because I find the behavior occurred
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and it does not raise concerns about her
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
AG ¶ 20(f) is not relevant to this case.9
A  State Court of Appeals succinctly explained the societal and judicial value of application of the statute of10
lim itations:
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that they stimulate
activity, punish negligence and promote repose by giving security and stability to human
affairs. The cornerstone policy consideration underlying statutes of limitations is the laudable
goal of law to promote and achieve finality in litigation. Significantly, statutes of limitations
provide potential defendants with certainty that after a set period of time, they will not be
7
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of
Applicant’ s financial problems arose because her former significant other obtained and
used credit cards without her knowledge, without sufficient financial resources to pay
the debt incurred. She also used the credit cards and attempted to make the payments
for sometime after she ended her long-term relationship with him. His failure to provide
child support and her limited earning capacity prevented her from keeping up the
payments. I find this potentially mitigating condition partially applies in this case. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not met with a financial
counselor. However, in the last eight years, she has always paid her mortgage and car
payments. In the last three years, she acquired several new credit cards with a small
credit line. She regularly makes these payments. She does not live beyond her income
and manages her current financial resources prudently. This mitigating condition applies
partially.
Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant paid
one recent overdue debt, but has not paid any other debts. She has not initiated any
payments of her older debts, I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not
apply.
Applicant did not recognize many of the debtors listed in the SOR, although at
the hearing, when the original creditor was identified, she did recognize the debt. When
she did not recognize two debts, she challenged the validity with the credit reporting
companies as shown by her January 2008 credit report.  AG ¶ 20(e) “the individual has
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue” partially applies.9
She also receives some credit in the whole person analysis, infra, for the
application of the State’s 6-year statute of limitations, which applies to all the debts
listed in the SOR except the debts in allegations 1.m and 1.n. Under State law, the
creditors are time barred from collecting these debts See  State Code. Ann. §44-501.10
ha[led] into court to defend time-barred claims. Moreover, limitations periods discourage
plaintiffs from sitting on their rights.  Statutes of limitations are, indeed, fundamental to our
judicial system.
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 (Ct. App. 2005) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted).
8
Elimination of these delinquent debts through the statute of limitations has ended her
potential vulnerability to improper financial inducements related to these debts as she
no longer has any legal responsibility for these debts. The fact that these debts are very
old and not collectible under state law does not negate her past conduct in not paying
her outstanding debts, a factor I must consider.  
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a
serious problem. Although finances were usually very limited during her long-term
relationship, she always paid the mortgage and car payments. Her financial problems
first became unmanageable when her significant other started obtaining credit cards
and abusing the credit. While she used the cards for family needs and initially paid the
bills, over time, the bills began to mount. When she ended her relationship, she tried,
but could not continue making payments on the credit card debt, in part because she
received no financial support from her significant other. (See AG & 2(a)(1)-(3).) 
Applicant obtained employment in 2000 and has worked steadily since this time.
She returned to school, eventually earning an associates degree. With her additional
education skills, she sought better paying employment in order to provide for her
9
children. Her credit reports show no outstanding debt from her education. See AG
¶2(a)(6).
Applicant became the sole financial provider for her three children when she
ended her long-term relationship with their father. In determining how to use her limited
resources, she made decisions which provided her children with their basic needs, such
as livable housing, food and clothes. To meet these needs, Applicant needed
transportation to and from work since the rural area where she lived lacked public
transportation. She has purchased and paid for two used cars.  Her two recent, small
debts arose when she disputed the charges, one for services she did not receive and
one for telephone calls not made by her family. On her own, Applicant has paid her bills
in a timely manner and managed her limited financial resources prudently. She currently
works two jobs. In the last eight years, Applicant had to make choices about using her
scare resources. She always made financial decisions which favored providing for the
needs of her children. She made an effort to pay the credit card debt incurred during her
long-term relationship, but ultimately decided that she needed to start fresh financially
and went to school for better employment opportunities. Since that time, Applicant has
undergone significant behavioral changes. She works steadily and consistently. She is a
reliable and dependable employee. She pays her current bills and limits the amount of
credit on her credit cards. She pays her bills and fights with creditors over bills she does
not believe she owes. She acts responsibly in all aspects of her life. Her current
finances are good. She has no criminal record and her children are doing well. She has
focused her attention on providing a stable domestic environment for her family. Over
the years, she has lacked sufficient resources to pay her old credit card debt; however,
that debt was never reduced to a judgment and the Statute of Limitations has expired,
making it uncollectible. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Thus, these debts cannot be a source of
improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her debts
are paidBit is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to
hold a security clearance. While some old debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to
raise security concerns as she has demonstrated that she is a reliable and responsible
individual. (See AG & 2(a)(1), (7)-(9).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
10
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
