 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-11826 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
Paul DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by her financial history. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 8, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on April 1, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 2, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
 
2 
 
on April 24, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. Department Counsel also submitted a graph summarizing 
the debts in the SOR and which exhibits support each allegation. Applicant did not 
object and the summarization was accepted as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf, called three witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep 
the record open until May 8, 2008, to submit additional matters through Department 
Counsel. Applicant submitted six pages of documents which were marked AE E though 
I, and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is marked HE II. The 
record closed on May 8, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
1, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, and 1.r. She denied the remaining allegations.  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She is on unpaid leave from her defense contractor 
employer pending the outcome of her security clearance determination. She is attending 
college. She is married with two children, ages ten and four, and she has a 19-year-old 
stepdaughter.1  
 
 Applicant and two younger siblings were raised by a struggling single parent. Her 
mother started putting utility bills in Applicant’s name before she was an adult. Applicant 
served in the U.S. Army from 1993 through 2000. She was honorably discharged on the 
basis of parenthood. The father of her child paid Applicant $300 per month without a 
court order. She finally obtained a court order in March 2007, directing the father to pay 
$513 per month and an additional $25 per month against arrears of $2,289. Between 
about 1997 and 1999, her mother had a type of breakdown and was unable to care for 
Applicant’s two younger siblings. Applicant began paying her mother’s rent payments. 
Eventually both younger siblings came to live with her. Her mother was a compulsive 
gambler and would gamble her money away. Her mother continued to put utility 
accounts in Applicant’s name without her permission and then let the bills become 
delinquent. Her mother was eventually incarcerated for theft. Applicant helped pay her 
mother’s bail and legal bills. She chose not to prosecute her mother for identity theft.2   
 
 Applicant has been unemployed a number of times over the last seven years. 
She also helped pay her stepdaughter’s college tuition. She and her husband were 
married in the fall of 2007. Her husband took out loans of about $6,000 to pay for the 
wedding and he had about $4,000 saved which paid for the honeymoon.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7, 75-79; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 41, 75-79; GE 1, 5; AE A-D. 
 
3 Tr. at 88-89; GE 1, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 The SOR lists 25 delinquent debts totaling about $38,600. Applicant admitted to 
owing seven debts totaling approximately $20,600. Individual debts are discussed 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1b list judgments of $5,980 and $6,801 to the same financial 
institution, awarded against Applicant in about September 2006. SOR ¶ 1.q lists a debt 
of $5,105 to the same financial institution for a car voluntarily repossessed in 2002. 
Applicant admits the judgment of $6,801, but denies the other two allegations stating 
they all represent the same debt. Applicant stated the car was a lemon and she asked 
the finance company to repossess it. After considering all the evidence, I am satisfied 
that the three allegations represent one debt.4  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the medical debt of $212 as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This 
debt was incurred when Applicant was in a car accident and signed for the medical care 
of her husband’s daughter. The accident occurred in January 2005, before Applicant 
married the girl’s father. The stepdaughter received $700 from the insurance company. 
The money was used to pay for the girl’s prom and fees for her senior year in high 
school. She told Applicant that she would pay her the money back once she started 
working. She is no longer living with Applicant and her husband. She did not pay 
Applicant and Applicant has not paid the debt.5 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d of $145 to a company 
collecting on behalf of the university where Applicant attends college, but she stated it is 
not delinquent because the debt is in forbearance. She submitted a forbearance request 
which was dated December 13, 2007.6  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a debt of $181 to a company collecting on behalf of a 
telephone company. Applicant denied owing the debt She stated she paid a deposit of 
$250 on her telephone account and it was used to pay her final bill. She submitted no 
documentation on this debt at the hearing. She was asked to contact the creditor and 
submit a copy of her final bill from the creditor. She did not address this debt in her post-
hearing submission. She admitted owing the debt of $338, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, to a 
different collection company collecting on behalf of the same telephone company. She 
has not made any payments on this debt. She denied owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.u of $71, to the same collection company collecting on behalf of the same telephone 
company. She stated this debt is the same account as that listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. A debt 
of $72 to a different collection company collecting on behalf of the same telephone 
company is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.y. Applicant testified this was an account from her 
mother’s state and was opened by her mother without her authorization. The $71 and 
$72 debts do not appear on the two most recent credit reports in evidence.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 24-25, 33, 42-45; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
5 Tr. at 45-49; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE G.  
 
6 Tr. at 25-26, 49-50; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE H. 
 
7 Tr. at 51, 54, 60, 67; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the medical debt of $74, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. The 
name of the creditor is not listed in the SOR, or on the credit reports submitted in 
evidence. Applicant stated she has no idea who the debt is owed to or what it is for.8 
 
 Applicant stated that the debt of $242 to a company collecting on behalf of a 
check cashing company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, was paid by a friend. Her friend 
testified that she paid this debt in about 2002, and Applicant repaid her.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i lists a medical debt of $934, assigned to a collection company. 
Applicant testified this debt occurred when she was in the Army and she was injured in 
training in 1994, and taken to the hospital in an ambulance. The military would be 
required to pay her medical bills while she was on active duty. She stated she 
attempted to have this resolved for more than a decade and that her credit counseling 
company will work on having it removed from her credit report. Applicant testified that 
the debt of $196 to the same collection company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l represents the 
same debt with tacked on fees. She further testified that the medical debt of $772, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o also represents the same debt. The name of the creditor is not 
listed in the SOR, or on the credit reports submitted in evidence. The credit report of 
February 1, 2007, states the debt is for “dentists.” Applicant submitted no 
documentation on these debts. She admitted that she owed the $36 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k.10 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debt of $336 to a department store, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.j. She stated payments on this debt are coming out of her account. She was 
asked to provide documentation of the payments after the hearing. She did not address 
this debt in her post-hearing submission. She also admitted that she owed the $428 
debt to a telephone company as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n.11 
 
 The debt of $239, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m is to a gas utility in the city in which 
Applicant’s mother lives. The city is in a different state than where Applicant resides. 
Applicant stated this is one of the utilities that her mother put in her name without her 
permission.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p is a debt of $2,197 owed to the Department of Veterans Affairs. The 
debt was paid in February 2008, by a withholding from Applicant’s federal income tax 
refund.13 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 52-54; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 3, 4. 
 
9 Tr. at 26-27, 96-98; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
10 Tr. at 27-31, 56-57; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
11 Tr. at 55-56; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
12 Tr. at 31, 57-59; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
13 Tr. at 31-33; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4; AE I. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the debt of $12,466 to a financial institution after an 
automobile repossession, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r. She stated she signed the car loan in 
the initial amount of about $24,000, which included financing costs, for her mother’s car. 
Her mother paid on the loan with her Social Security payments until she was arrested 
and could not make the payments. Applicant stated she thought if her mother had a car 
that she might not have the need to shoplift, which is how her mother funded her 
gambling.14  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t list debts of $270 and $194 to a company collecting on behalf 
of a cable provider. Applicant disputed owing these debts. She stated the debts were for 
a cable box that was returned to the cable provider. The debts are listed on the credit 
report of February 1, 2007, but not the more recent credit reports in evidence. SOR ¶ 
1.x lists a debt of $428 to the same cable provider through a different collection 
company. This debt is listed on the credit report of September 14, 2004, submitted by 
Applicant with her response to Interrogatories, and on the credit report of February 1, 
2007. It is not listed on the two recent credit reports in evidence.15 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.v lists a debt of $238 to a financial institution. SOR ¶ 1.w lists a debt of 
$654 to a different financial institution. Applicant denied owing these two debts. She 
stated that these were government loans that were recouped from her federal income 
tax refunds. When questioned further, Applicant stated they were not government loans, 
but they were loans that were provided only to military members and the service 
members sign authorizations for the companies to debit their accounts. Applicant was 
provided the opportunity to submit documentary proof that these debts were paid 
through her income tax refunds. She submitted a document from the Department of the 
Treasury showing offsets of $319 and $187 in 2004 and 2005. The document 
references the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS). The credit report of 
September 14, 2004, submitted by Applicant with her response to Interrogatories, lists a 
delinquent debt of $157 to DFAS. There is nothing to show that the offsets were for 
private commercial loans, as opposed to a government obligation. The debts do not 
appear on the two recent credit reports in evidence. The debts are old and would not be 
expected to continue to be reported after seven years. Applicant’s testimony that the 
debts were paid from her income tax refunds is not credible. There was no credible 
evidence presented that these debts were paid.16 
 
 Applicant met with an individual in 2004, who described himself as a “credit 
counselor.” His fee was $2,500. She could not afford that much. She consulted with 
another individual who presented himself as a bankruptcy attorney. She paid him $250 
to start the process of declaring bankruptcy. He was not an attorney and she eventually 
received part of her money back. She recently contacted a credit counseling service 
that will assist Applicant in removing items from her credit report. They also provide 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 34-39; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
15 Tr. at 60-62, 66-67; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
16 Tr. at 62-66; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2-4; AE I. 
 
 
6 
 
counseling services. She paid $600 to this company. She is unable to do anything while 
she is unemployed, but her plan is to consolidate any debts not removed from her credit 
report and pay $600 per month to the company to pay her debts.17 
 
 Applicant’s witnesses testified that they have never known her to do anything 
illegal or immoral. She is described as frugal and not someone living beyond her 
means. She is very willing to help others. They believe she is trustworthy and a good 
person.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 23-24, 41-42, 69-72, 80, 103-106; GE 5. 
 
18 Tr. at 82-86, 95-96, 99. 
 
 
7 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay her 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
8 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant still owes a large amount of delinquent debt. This continues to cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Much of Applicant’s financial problems are related to her mother, who is a 
compulsive gambler and a thief. Applicant was forced to care for her two younger 
siblings. She has gone through periods of unemployment. These conditions were 
beyond her control. She signed for a loan for about $24,000 for a car for her mother, 
while knowing that her mother was a compulsive gambler. She has also made no 
attempt to pay even the smallest of the debts in the SOR. She did not act responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. There are not clear indications that 
her financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not require 
both; it only requires one or the other. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. 
 
The only debt that was paid by Applicant was the debt owed to the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, which was involuntarily withheld from Applicant’s federal income tax 
refund. Her friend paid one debt in 2002, and then was repaid by Applicant. That is 
insufficient information to establish that Applicant showed good faith in the resolution of 
her debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant submitted sufficient evidence that her mother opened accounts in her 
name without her permission. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 
1.y. She stated that several medical debts were related to when she was on active duty 
in the military in 1994, and some were duplicates. She did not provide any 
documentation to substantiate her claim. I will credit Applicant with the potential 
duplicates, but I am unable to find AG ¶ 20(e) applicable to all her medical debts. The 
name of the creditor for the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. is not listed in the SOR, or on the 
credit reports submitted in evidence. Applicant disputed owing that debt stating she had 
no idea who the debt was supposedly owed to. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to that medical 
debt. Applicant disputed owing a cable provider for the return of a cable box. The debts 
 
9 
 
to that cable provider are not listed on the two most recent credit reports in evidence. 
AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.s, 1.t, and 1.x. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s difficulties started even 
before she became an adult. Her mother is a compulsive gambler and a thief, leaving 
Applicant to take care of her two younger siblings. She also paid many of her mother’s 
legal fees associated with her various arrests. Additionally, she has been unemployed 
on several occasions. I also considered her honorable service in the U.S. Army and her 
very favorable character evidence. However, she made some questionable decisions 
such as signing for the loan of $24,000 for a car for her mother and she has made no 
real effort to repay even her small debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.q:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s-1.u:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.v-1.w:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.x-1.y:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
