1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )             ISCR Case No. 07-15150
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her security clearance application (SCA) on May 15, 2007.
On February 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the criminal conduct
guideline (Guideline J), the drug involvement guideline (Guideline H), and the financial
considerations guideline (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted her notarized answer to the SOR on February 26, 2008. She
elected to have her case decided administratively without a hearing. A copy of the
government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support of
the list of allegations in the SOR) was sent to Applicant on March 19, 2008. Applicant
received the FORM on March 25, 2008. Applicant’s response was due by April 25,
2
2008. No response was received. The case was assigned to this administrative judge
on May 9, 2008. Based upon a review of the FORM and the entire case file, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted seven allegations under paragraph 1 (criminal conduct). She
also admitted all three allegations under paragraph 2 (drug involvement). Finally, she
admitted all 13 debts under paragraph 3 (financial considerations). Applicant provided
no explanation for the criminal conduct. With regard to the drug allegations, Applicant
claimed she quit using drugs in 1998. Her explanation for the financial debts is that she
was trying to help family members. She then stated that, “I have been paying things off.”
Applicant is 49 years old, and has been employed in several positions with her
company since October 2000. She is currently a stock clerk. She seeks a secret
security clearance. 
Criminal Conduct (CC)
When Applicant was approximately 34 or 35 years old, she pled guilty to driving
while under the influence of a controlled substance. (SOR 1.g.) She was sentenced to
five years probation, 180 hours of community service, and ordered to attend a driving
while under the influence (DUI) course. A bench warrant was issued after she failed to
comply with the terms of probation. 
On March 9, 1995, Applicant was arrested for being under the influence of a
controlled drug (SOR 1.e.), riding a bike under the influence of drugs, and disorderly
conduct related to drugs. Applicant was accepted into a drug diversion program, but
was terminated for failing to comply with the requirements of the program. On August
15, 1996, Applicant pled no contest to the drug possession charges, and was sentenced
to 6 days in jail. The record does not disclose the status of her probationary sentence
she received in SOR 1.g. 
Applicant was arrested for possession of stolen property (SOR 1.f.) on July 9,
1996. In August 1996, Applicant pled guilty to the charge. She received seven days in
jail and probation for three years. In October of the same year, Applicant was charged
with being under the influence of drugs; she was sentenced to 90 days imprisonment
and three years probation. Her probation was terminated on February 1998, when she
violated the probation terms of the July 1996 offense, and the February 1998 offense in
SOR 1.a.
On June 17, 1997 (SOR 1.c.), Applicant was charged with failure to stop, driving
while license suspended, no insurance, and no registration. She failed to appear for
arraignment on the charge and a warrant was issued. On September 22, 1997,
Applicant was sentenced to nine days in jail on the SOR 1.c. charge. On September 17,
1997 (SOR 1.b.), Applicant  was charged with use/under the influence of controlled
3
substance (2 charges), presenting false identification to a police officer, possession of a
controlled substance paraphernalia, and receiving stolen property. She was convicted
and served time for the first two charges of possession of paraphernalia, and the
paraphernalia charge. Applicant served 51 days in jail, followed by time on work
release. While serving time on work release, she was charged with the SOR 1.a.
offense. 
On February 13, 1998 (SOR 1.a.), Applicant was charged with possession of
cocaine base for sale, possession of a narcotic controlled substance, and use/under the
influence of a controlled substance. Applicant received jail time (not gleaned from the
record), and placed on probation for two years, which she completed in October 2000.
Drug Involvement (DI)
Applicant began using cocaine (SOR 2.a.) in 1990. She became dependent on
the drug, and by 1996, she was using the drug at least 2 or 3 times a week. (SOR 2.b.)
In addition to using the drug, she began to sell it to others in 1996. Applicant used
cocaine until February 1998. (SOR 2.c.)
Financial Involvement (FI)
There are 13 delinquent debts listed under the financial guideline. The accounts
are for utility bills, credit cards, furniture, and telephone service. The total amount of the
delinquent debt is $9,728.00. In her answers to interrogatories (Item 6), supplied to the
government of December 10, 2007, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement
(PFS). The PFS reflects she has $1,215.00 of discretionary income left each month,
after subtracting her monthly expenses from her monthly income. The only explanation
provided by Applicant for the debts is that she was trying to help family members. She
also claimed she was paying the debts off. Applicant provided no additional
documentation regarding the debt. 
Character Evidence
Applicant stressed that the drug use and criminal conduct should no longer be a
concern as she has not been involved in either activity for 10 years. Her faith in her
church helped her beat drug use. No additional information was provided.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are flexible rules of law that are applied in conjunction with the general policy factors of
the whole person concept.
4
The protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an around-
the-clock responsibility. The Government places a high degree of trust and confidence
in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise
of classified information.
Criminal Conduct (CC)
Criminal behavior casts doubts concerning a person’s judgment and
trustworthiness.
Drug Involvement (DI)
Besides being against the law, drug use fosters poor judgment.
Financial Considerations (FC)
Inability to pay bills in a responsible fashion raises the chances of irresponsible
behavior such as breaking the law to generate funds. 
Analysis
30. The Concern. “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, and
reliability. By it’s very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
Applicant’s criminal conduct from 1993 to February 1998 establishes a pattern of
behavior that falls within CC (DC) 31.a. (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
5
offenses) In 1993 (SOR 1.g.), Applicant exercised poor judgment by ingesting drugs
and then attempted to operate a car. She exacerbated her conduct by not satisfying the
terms of her probation, leading to a warrant for her arrest. In March 1995, Applicant was
charged with three new offenses related to her drug use. Applicant did not take
advantage of the drug diversion program, and the charges were reinstated, culminating
in her no contest plea to disorderly conduct related to drugs. 
 Over the next three years, Applicant was convicted of seven new charges
relating to her drug use. The charge in February 1998 was the most serious because
Applicant was caught with paraphernalia, and provided a false identity to law
enforcement in an effort to not have her true identity detected. 
Even though Applicant provided little information about how and why she stopped
committing crimes, I believe her criminal conduct was a function of her drug use. When
she stopped using drugs, she stopped engaging in criminal behavior. Though the
conduct was not isolated, it occurred in a five-year period, about 10 years ago. CC MC
32.a. (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior occurred, or it happened
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
CC MC 32.d. (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement) also applies based on Applicant’s credible though short
explanation of her church’s role in convincing her to stop her criminal behavior and drug
involvement in 1998. The combination of the passage of time and Applicant’s church
involvement convince me she will stand by her 10-year-old period of abstinence, and
continue to forego all drug use in the future. 
Drug Involvement (DI)
DI DC 25.a. (any drug abuse) and DI DC 25.c. (illegal drug possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of
drug paraphernalia) apply to Applicant’s drug use that occurred between 1993 and
February 1998. DI MC 26.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) receives
considerable attention when evaluated with a demonstrated intention not to engage in
future use as set forth in DI MC 26.b. (1) (disassociation from drug-using associates and
contacts), (2) (changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used), and (3)
(an appropriate period of abstinence). Applicant realizes that her religious faith stopped
her drug use. I am confident she will continue her strong relationship with her church to
preclude any possibility of sliding into drug use and probable criminal behavior. 
6
Financial Considerations (FC) 
Two disqualifying conditions apply: FC DC 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant
has carried some of this delinquent debt for three years or more without any effort on
her part to resolve the debt individually or collectively. The only mitigating condition that
could apply is FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances). It is fair to conclude that Applicant’s growing drug problem between
1993 and 1998 had a negative impact on her overall finances. However, the termination
of her drug problem in 1998 should have been a turning point in her life, allowing her to
gain a new perspective on her objectives. Though she claims she was providing
financial help for her family members, that decision to provide assistance was within her
control, and receives no recognition under FC MC 20.b. 
Applicant’s claim she is trying to pay off debts calls for consideration of FC MC
20.d. (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts). The condition does not apply as Applicant has provided no
documentation of the debts she has paid. Without sufficient evidence to mitigate,
extenuate, or explain the reasons why her debts became delinquent and/or documented
efforts to repay the debts, Applicant’s scant evidence in mitigation does not satisfy her
ultimate burden of demonstrating she is entitled to security clearance eligibility. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
While Applicant has met her burden of persuasion under the CC and DI
guidelines, she has not shown she is entitled to a security clearance under the FC
guideline. The same conclusion is reached even after the circumstances of this case
are evaluated in the context of the whole person. Without a plan in progress that
indicates an effort to repay the creditors, the FC guideline is resolved against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Criminal Conduct, Guideline J): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1b. For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For applicant
Subparagraph 1f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1g. For Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Drug Involvement, Guideline H): FOR APPLICANT
7
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Paragraph 3 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
