1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )      ISCR Case No. 07-10307
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James E. Simpson, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 22 October 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines G, J, and E.  Applicant answered the SOR 15 November 2008, and1
requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 20 December 2008, and I
convened a hearing 5 February 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 14 February
2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the Guideline G and J allegations, but denied the Guideline E
allegation. She is a 36-year-old information engineer employed by a defense contractor
since April 1997. She seeks to retain the clearance she has held since March 1998.
Applicant has a 10-year history of excessive alcohol consumption, punctuated by
four alcohol-related incidents: a June 1994 conviction for operating under the influence
of liquor (OUIL), a March 1997 conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol
(DUI), an October 2003 conviction for DUI, and a July 2004 arrest for public
intoxication—for which she paid a fine. During these 10 years, Applicant estimated her
alcohol consumption as 4-6 drinks twice per week. She successfully completed the
sentencing requirements of each of her convictions.
At the time of the July 2004 arrest, she was still under probation for her October
2003 DUI. She did not believe that she was intoxicated at the time of the arrest, but paid
the fine on-line without contesting the citation. However, she was summoned to a show
cause hearing on her probation. The magistrate apparently accepted her explanation
that she was not intoxicated at the time of the arrest, because she continued her on
probation.
Applicant’s 1994 and 1997 convictions were initially adjudicated during her first
background investigation in 1998. In January 1998 she was interviewed by a
government investigator. During the interview she stated her intent to not drive under
the influence of alcohol in the future. She was ultimately granted the clearance that is at
issue.
Applicant describes her current alcohol consumption as a couple of glasses of
wine when out to dinner with her friends, no more than twice a month. She sometimes
has a glass of wine with her dinner at home. She no longer goes out to bars with her
friends. When she is going out to dinner with her friends and expects that she will be
drinking, she makes arrangements to avoid driving herself. She has adopted a healthier
lifestyle, eating better and going to the gym regularly. She has not been diagnosed as
alcohol dependent or an alcohol abuse.
Applicant’s employment evaluations (A.E. A) are uniformly excellent, and her
work references (A.E. B) consider her extremely trustworthy. However, it does not
appear that any of them are aware of the SOR allegations. 
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
3
¶22.(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; . . . (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
3
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline G, by
demonstrating Applicant’s 10-year history of alcohol abuse, punctuated by alcohol-
related arrests in June 1994, March 1997, October 2003, and July 2004.  However,3
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Neither the prior adjudication of the 1994 and
1997 convictions, nor the six-year gap between the 1997 and 2003 convictions,
precludes the government from revisiting her alcohol consumption over the entire 10
years. Nevertheless, Applicant acknowledged her past problems with alcohol, and took
steps to reduce her consumption, and avoid circumstances that had previously been
4
¶23.(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent)
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
5
¶31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
6
¶32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage
of time without recurrence or criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement;
7
¶ 16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information; (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. . . ;
4
troublesome for her.  Her avoidance of bars, arranging alternate transportation4
whenever she contemplates consuming alcohol while with her friends, and her changes
to a healthier daily routine demonstrate that Applicant is committed to consuming
alcohol responsibly. I conclude Applicant is unlikely to abuse alcohol in the future.
Accordingly, I resolve Guideline G for Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline J by
establishing Applicant’s four alcohol-related convictions between June 1994 and July
2004.  However, Applicant mitigated the security concerns. While the misconduct5
cannot be considered distant in time, the criminal conduct was inextricably connected to
Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption. Given my conclusion that Applicant is
unlikely to abuse alcohol in the future, I consider it extremely unlikely Applicant would
ever engage in this misconduct again.  I resolve Guideline J for Applicant.6
The government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guideline E.7
The questionable judgment shown by driving under the influence of alcohol is not made
more questionable by having previously stated an intent to avoid such conduct in the
future.Furthermore, returning to responsible drinking practices demonstrates good
judgment, as does the passage of more than five years since the last DUI. I resolve
Guideline E for Applicant.
5
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
