1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )        ISCR Case No. 07-16518
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 12 March 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
F.  Applicant answered the SOR 27 March 2008, and requested a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 16 April 2008, and I convened a hearing 12 May 2008. DOHA
received the transcript (Tr.) 20 May 2008.
 
At hearing, Department Counsel indicated that based on the evidence the government did not intend to2
go forward with the allegation at SOR 1.n. Accordingly, I consider that allegation withdrawn.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegations except for SOR 1.a., 1.b., and 1.g. He is a
26-year-old senior technician employed by a defense contractor since November 2004.
He has not previously held a clearance.
The SOR alleges, and government exhibits confirm, 13 delinquent debts totaling
over $7,000.  Applicant was questioned about these debts during an interview with a2
government investigator in March 2007. The contents of that interview are unknown
because Applicant either does not remember what he said to the investigator, or flatly
denies any admissions attributed to him. After the interview, Applicant claims to have
been in contact with some of the creditors, but he is unable to corroborate that he did so
or that he resolved any of the debts. Following receipt of the SOR, Applicant hired a law
firm specializing in credit issues, and is disputing all 13 debts (A.E. A, B). However, he
has not yet received any answers to the law firm’s inquiries of his creditors
In January 2007, Applicant was served with paternity papers seeking back child
support for a child alleged to be his. Applicant asserted that this was the first he knew
he was alleged to have fathered a child. He disputed paternity, but was ultimately found
to have fathered the child. His 2008 state and federal tax refunds, in an amount
approximating the debt alleged at SOR 1.f., were seized in February 2008 and applied
to his account (A.E. C). However, his most recent earnings statement reflects that he is
making bi-weekly payments for child support and arrears (A.E. F).
Although Applicant denies having financial difficulties—and thus offers no
reasons that he might have such difficulties—he describes personal circumstances that
might explain the confusing state of his credit reports: divorce from his first wife, multiple
moves while in the military, maintaining a residence in the U.S. while he was deployed
overseas. Nevertheless, the circumstances described do not match the level of disarray
displayed by his credit reports.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
4
¶19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan
to pay the debt; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; . . .  
5
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
6
¶20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
3
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s credit reports establish his
indebtedness. Applicant was aware of the alleged debts since at least March 2007, yet
he took no effective action to address the debts before the SOR was issued.  The only4
action taken by Applicant after the SOR was issued was to hire a law firm to dispute the
debts. That effort may bear fruit, but not in time to be much help to Applicant in this
case.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  There is no evidence the debts were5
due to circumstances beyond his control and he has not acted responsibly in
addressing his debts.  There is no evidence that he has sought credit counseling or6
7
¶20.© the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
4
otherwise brought the problem under control.  None of the alleged debts have been7
paid, much less in a timely, good-faith effort.  Further, given his unwillingness to seek or8
use financial counseling, there is nothing in the record to suggest that Applicant will put
his financial problems behind him. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
Subparagraph g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph n: Withdrawn
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
