                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15619 
 SSN:  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On November 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 18, 2007, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on February 19, 2008. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant on February 27, 2008, and it was received on March 4, 2008. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit any 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted allegations 1.a and 1.c in the SOR. He denied the remaining 
allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
statements submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since January 
2006. He is presently married and twice divorced. He has two children, one who is an 
adult and the other is 13 years old.  
 
 Applicant admits he owed the debt in SOR 1.a for a car repossession incurred in 
April 2001, in the amount of $11,501. He has not provided any information or 
documents to show he has paid this debt or has been paying this debt. In response to 
question 27 on Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA) (dated June 19, 2007), 
referencing this debt Applicant stated:  
 
 When I checked my credit this showing 3 times. This is due to come off 
my credit in 4/2008 because of lack of work and pay I had to make a 
decision to either eat or pay for a car I couldn’t afford to drive [so I] gave 
the car back and made arrangements with the finance company.1  
 
He did not provide any information about his payment arrangements or provide any 
proof that he has paid the debt. 
 
 Applicant admits he owes the debt in SOR 1.c to a collection agency for $673. As 
of July 7, 2007, this debt is still owed. Applicant stated on his SCA in reference to this 
debt the following:  
 
 This will show up on my report at least 2 more times because passing 
from one collection agency to another. This is due to come off my credit 
report by 3-2008. Again it was a [choice] between eating or paying this bill 
and [I] tried to make arrangements but the finance company was not 
willing to work with me.2  
 
Applicant has not provided any information or documents to show he has paid this debt 
or has been paying this debt. 
 
1 Item 4 at p. 32. 
 
2 Id. at p. 33. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant denies he owes the debts in SOR 1.b, 1.d. and 1.e. The debts listed in 
1.d and 1. e are judgments. The judgment for debt 1.d was entered on October 19, 
2000, in the amount of $962. This debt is accruing interest at 9%, so balance owed will 
obviously be greater.3 The judgment for debt 1.e was entered on April 15, 1999, in the 
amount of $341. This debt is accruing interest at 9%, so the balance owed will be 
greater.4 Applicant’s response to these debts that he denied in the SOR is the following: 
“I am providing a credit report showing that I don’t owe or have paid off the following: 
[1.b, 1.d, and 1.e].” This statement contradicts the judgment documents.5 Applicant did 
not provide any documents to show he has paid both judgments or paid the debt listed 
in 1.b ($1,142).  
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR stated:  
 
It is a fact that I didn’t use my credit wisely in the past. I fully accept 
responsibility for not making wise decisions. This, however, shouldn’t 
reflect on my character or what kind of person I am. If you look at my 
credit history from 2002 until the present you will see that I have been 
much more responsible in regard to making monetary decisions.6 
 
On his SCA Applicant lists he was unemployed from January 2004 to January 2006. He 
provided no other information regarding his financial or employment issues.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
3 Item 7. 
 
4 Item 8. 
 
5 Items 7 and 8. 
 
6 Answer. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them, especially AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has three 
delinquent debts and two judgments that remain unpaid. Despite being aware of them 
 
5 
 
 
they have been unpaid for many years. He did not provide any proof that he has paid 
any of them. I find both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions. I especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”), (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”), (c) (“the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”), and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”).  
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts. He alluded to the debts being incurred 
during a period of unemployment, but he did not elaborate on the specifics of why he 
has not taken any action on them since then. At least some of them were incurred while 
he was employed. He has been employed at his present job since January 2006. There 
is no evidence that despite his employment issues he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Therefore I find (a) and (b) are not applicable. There is no evidence 
Applicant received counseling to assist him in resolving his financial problems. There 
are no indications the problems are being resolved or that he has initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay his creditors. It appears Applicant’s attitude is that because some debts 
were due to drop off his credit report, or have since dropped off, then he is not 
responsible for paying them. Despite the legal implication of debts being removed from 
a credit report after seven years, it does not show Applicant has acted responsibly 
toward his just debts. He stated in his answer that certain debts were paid or no longer 
owed, but provided no proof as to this claim. In fact two of the debts are judgments that 
were entered in 1999 and 2000 and continue to accrue interest. I find none of the 
remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
 
6 
 
 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred debts that 
became delinquent. Two of the debts have judgments that were entered prior to his 
period of unemployment. He has not provided any proof that he has paid any of the 
debts in the SOR. Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
