 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10901 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On January 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 9, 2008. He did not 
specifically state whether he wanted a hearing. On February 23, 2008, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge pursuant to ¶ E3.1.7 of the 
Directive. The case was assigned to me on March 11, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on March 14, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 15, 2008. The 
Government called one witness and offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 23, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through M, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s request 
to keep the record open until April 29, 2008, to submit additional matters through 
Department Counsel. No additional evidence was submitted. The record closed on April 
29, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 23, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all the factual allegations in the SOR. 
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a high school 
graduate. He was married in 1985 and divorced in 1999. He remarried in 2003. He was 
a stepfather to his first wife’s two children. He and his current wife have an infant child 
and he is stepfather to her two children.1  
 
 Applicant and his first wife separated in late 1997, prior to their acrimonious 
divorce. He provided her with about $5,000 to $10,000 to pay their debts. She did not 
pay all the debts that she agreed to pay. He injured his shoulder, requiring surgery in 
April 1998. He was unemployed from about December 1998 through September 2000. 
He received Workers’ Compensation which ended before he started working again. He 
had another operation on his shoulder in March 2000. Applicant relocated several times 
since 2000, and had additional periods of unemployment.2   
 
 Applicant denied owing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1b, and 1.c, which list debts of 
$11,128, $10,377, and $5,397 to the same credit union. SOR ¶ 1.a is for an auto loan. 
The two other debts are installment loans. Applicant had an account with a credit union 
under a different name than the credit union listed in the SOR. In November 2003, 
Applicant’s credit union merged with and into the credit union named in the allegations. 
He stated he was never informed of the name change. He further stated that his former 
wife took out loans in his name. Three loan applications with his credit union were 
introduced as evidence. A loan application dated November 1996, to increase a 
signature loan by $974 to $9,672 already owed, for a balance of $10,647, does not 
show a signature. The loan is only in Applicant’s name and the application indicates that 
the signature is on the check. An application dated July 11, 1997, to obtain an additional 
$4,000 on a signature loan to bring the balance to more than $13,000, was signed by 
both Applicant and his former wife. This is an application for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b. Applicant subsequently admitted that he owed this debt. The last application is to 
advance $12,120 on an existing auto loan, raising the balance of the loan to $17,080. 
The loan was secured by three vehicles. Applicant’s ex-wife signed the application and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 47-48, 62, 113-114; GE 1, 2, 9; AE C. 
 
2 Tr. at 33, 48-55, 58-59, 91; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
3 
 
there is a signature purporting to be signed by Applicant. There is no date next to the 
signature but the date of the advance is July 15, 1997, the same day the $4,000 was 
advanced in the previous application. Applicant stated his wife signed his name on this 
application without his knowledge.3 After viewing the signatures and comparing them, I 
find the signature on that application was not signed by Applicant.  
 
 Applicant sent a letter to his credit union on December 30, 1997, asking them to 
remove his wife’s name from all accounts. Applicant initially testified that the only debt 
he was aware of was the debt that he signed for. The loan with the disputed signature 
was an auto loan. The loan application he admitted signing was for a signature loan. He 
stated he only became aware of the other two loans when he received copies of the 
documents from Department Counsel. In March 2000, the credit union agreed to permit 
Applicant to switch one vehicle solely into his name, with the credit union remaining as 
the secured party on the lien of $3,625. Applicant stated he was unaware of the lien 
before he went to title the vehicle in his name. He stated that he closed out all his 
accounts and made sure that everything was paid off in about 2000, when he asked the 
company to repossess the car that secured the loan. He stated that he was never told 
that there was a deficiency balance owed on the loan. Applicant’s initial testimony that 
he was only aware of the debt he signed for was contradicted by his testimony about 
the car loan and the repossession.4   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d lists a judgment of $3,403 awarded against Applicant on September 
1, 1999, to his first wife’s credit union. The judgment was for a car loan that Applicant 
and his first wife co-signed in September 1994. Applicant and his ex-wife had four 
vehicles, one for each of them and two for her teenaged children. When they separated 
and divorced she took three cars and he took one. Applicant told a background 
investigator in November 2006, that he had no knowledge of this debt. He admitted at 
the hearing that he signed for this loan. He testified that he thought this car loan was 
paid by his ex-wife through a wage garnishment. Applicant admitted that he received a 
notice to appear in court for this lawsuit. He stated he received a second notice 
postponing the trial, but he never received another notice telling him when to appear.5   
 
 A judgment of $4,102 was awarded against Applicant to a financial institution on 
September 9, 1999, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant stated he borrowed $1,400 from 
the financial institution in about September 1995, to purchase a vehicle. He stated his 
stepson wrecked the car and he thought the insurance paid off the loan. The judgment 
was for a car loan that Applicant and his first wife co-signed in September 1994. 
Applicant admitted that he received a notice to appear in court for this lawsuit but he did 
not attend the trial.6   
                                                          
3 Tr. at 33-46, 75-85; GE 12-14, 23. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-46, 75-85; GE 13, 14, 16, 17. 
 
5 Tr. at 59-70; GE 4, 6, 8, 20-23. 
 
6 Tr. at 42, 70-75; GE 6, 7, 18, 19, 23. 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.l list seven medical debts to an “unidentified collection 
agency.” The debts range from $60 to $3,085 for a total of $6,313. Applicant stated that 
Workers’ Compensation should have covered these medical debts. He submitted 
documentation that his medical debts related to his shoulder were to be paid by 
Workers’ Compensation. The debts are listed on the credit report of January 7, 2006, 
but are not listed on the credit report of August 30, 2007 or the Experian credit report of 
October 17, 2007, submitted by Applicant with his response to Interrogatories.7 
 
 Applicant had two state tax liens filed in 1996 for $2,150 and in 1998 for $2,030. 
The taxes were paid and the liens released. Applicant is not delinquent on any of his 
current bills. He has never received financial counseling. He wrote in his Answer to the 
SOR for allegations ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e: 
 
Bankruptcy Lawyer advised me in 2005 that since it was possible my ex-
wife may have taken out fraudulent or additional loans and the [statute] of 
limitation was in effect. That it would not be advisable to settle this debt. 
 
Applicant submitted a letter dated February 6, 2008 from an attorney, which stated: 
 
Please be advised [Applicant] sought my assistance approximately two 
years ago to clear up discrepancies on his credit report. I contacted the 
various credit reporting agencies and the companies listed on his credit 
report. I requested that the credit reporting agencies remove any negative 
comments pertaining to these debts as [Applicant] had no reason to 
believe that he incurred these debts or that they should have been 
included in his credit reports. I requested each company to provide me 
with proof that these debts belonged to him. None were ever able to do 
so.8 
 
Applicant testified that now that he is aware of his delinquent debts that he plans on 
paying the debts that are in his name.9 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) 
signed on May 31, 2005. Question 28a asked, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Question 28b, asked, “Are you currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He did not answer “Yes” or “No.” he hand wrote in for 
Question 28a, “unknown.” For Question 28b, he wrote “Lawyer Researching.”10  
 
 Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86), certified as true on 
July 7, 2005. He answered “No” to Questions 37 and 38, which asked “In the last 7 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 93-105; GE 3-5; AE E, M. 
 
8 AE B. 
 
9 Tr. at 46, 65, 84, 109-112, 126; GE 1, 3-5; AE D, F-L. 
 
10 GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
years, have you had any judgements against you that have not been paid?” and “In the 
last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant 
answered “Yes” to Question 39, which asked, “Are you currently over 90 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” He listed a state tax debt of $3,900 incurred in September 
1996.11 
 
Applicant denied the three falsification allegations in the SOR. I considered all 
the evidence, including the derogatory information that Applicant included in the 
questionnaires. While Applicant’s testimony and prior statements about his finances are 
inconsistent and not totally credible, I find there is insufficient evidence for a finding that 
Applicant intentionally falsified his Security Clearance Application as alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
                                                          
11 GE 1. 
 
 
6 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
7 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s first wife did not take care of her part of the marital debts after a 
separation and acrimonious divorce. He was unemployed on several occasions and for 
an extended period after a shoulder injury. He currently owes more than $15,000 to a 
credit union for loans incurred in the 1990s, and more than $7,500 for two judgments 
awarded against him in 1999. Other than these debts, his financial situation is stable. 
However, while these debts remain unpaid, I am unable to find that AG ¶ 20(a) is fully 
applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were exacerbated by his unemployment and his 
first wife’s actions. These are actions that were largely beyond his control. He has not 
done anything to pay his debts after his employment stabilized. He did not act 
responsibly under the circumstance. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant has never received formal financial counseling, but he did retain an 
attorney to help him resolve discrepancies on his credit report. With the exception of the 
debts in the SOR, his financial situation is on track. It is questionable whether all the 
debts in the SOR are enforceable because of the statute of limitations. There are 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved and under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
is partially applicable 
 
Applicant paid his delinquent tax debts, but he has done nothing to pay the debts 
alleged in the SOR. At least some of the debts may be uncollectable because of the 
statute of limitations. AG ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply because there is insufficient 
information to establish that Applicant showed good faith in the resolution of his debts.12 
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
 
8 
 
He does however merit partial credit because of the statute of limitations.13 If Applicant’s 
debts are reduced by the statute of limitations, his potential vulnerability to improper 
financial inducements is also accordingly reduced.         
 
 Applicant initially disputed owing the debts to the credit union as alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. Applicant’s name on the credit application for the auto loan as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was not signed by him. While it is difficult to believe that Applicant 
was totally ignorant of this loan, I find that AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to that debt. His 
signature is on the application for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He subsequently 
admitted owing that debt. A credit application to the credit union for another loan was 
made in November 1996. Applicant’s signature is not on the application, but the loan 
request is in Applicant’s name only and the application states that the signature was on 
the check. This application was to increase an existing signature loan by $974 to $9,672 
already owed, for a balance of $10,647. The loan was made well before Applicant 
separated from his ex-wife and before he applied for the loan in SOR ¶ 1.b, which 
Applicant admitted was signed by him. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to the debts listed in 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. 
 
 Applicant states that the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.l should have 
been paid by Workers’ Compensation. He submitted documentation that medical debts 
related to his shoulder injury were to be paid by Workers’ Compensation. The debts 
were not listed on the two most recent credit reports in evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to the medical debts listed in ¶¶ 1.f through 1.l.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No.  99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
13 See ISCR 04-07360 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006) (stating partial credit was available for debts 
being resolved through garnishment). 
 
 
9 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, including AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” Applicant omitted information from his Security Clearance 
Application; however, there is insufficient evidence to find that it was a deliberate 
omission. No Personal Conduct disqualifying condition is raised by the evidence. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has had financial issues 
since at least the 1990s. He was unemployed on several occasions and his ex-wife 
significantly contributed to his financial problems. While his finances appear otherwise 
in satisfactory shape, he has made no real effort to repay his debts. Applicant omitted 
information about his finances from his Security Clearance Application. There is 
insufficient evidence that it was a deliberate omission. However, his inconsistent 
statements and testimony about his debts are a cause of concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
