 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-11206 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on July 10, 2006. On January 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On January 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
February 25, 2008. The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on 
February 27, 2008. The case was transferred to me on March 13, 2008. On March 14, 
2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 3, 2008. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 
2, which were admitted without objection. The Government requested that 
 
2 
 
 
administrative notice be taken of one document with 11 attachments. The document 
was marked as Administrative Notice Document 1 (Admin Not 1) without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted six exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A – F without objection. DOHA received the transcript of hearing on April 11, 2008.  
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Iran is a theocratic Islamic republic. The United States has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since April 7, 1980. The U.S. Department of State has set forth 
concerns of the United States with Iran’s policies as: (1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear 
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; (2) Iran’s support for and involvement 
in international terrorism; (3) Iran’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East 
peace process; and (4) Iran’s dismal human rights record. (Admin Not 1, Doc 1 at 9) 
The United States has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. (Admin Not 1, 
Doc 6 at 2.)  The government of Iran’s human rights abuses against the Iranian people 
include summary executions, lack of fair public trials, disappearances, torture, arbitrary 
arrest and detention, political prisoners and detainees, severe restrictions on freedom of 
religion, discrimination against women, and severe restrictions on civil liberties including 
speech, press, assembly, association, movement and privacy. (Admin Not 1, Doc 5 at 1; 
Doc 4 at 8.)  
 
 The U.S. State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens and U.S.–Iranian 
dual citizens to consider carefully the risks of travel to Iran. Some elements of the 
Iranian regime remain hostile to the U.S. and U.S. citizens. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens 
may be subject to harassment or arrest while residing in Iran. (Admin Not 1, Doc 3.) 
Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, and the children of such persons, are considered 
solely Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Under Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, 
unless the Iranian government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian 
citizenship. In the past, U.S.–Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to 
enter/depart Iran using their U.S. passport; they even had their U.S. passports 
confiscated upon arrival or departure. (Admin Not 1, Doc 2 at 1.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated January 30, 2008, Applicant admitted to all the 
SOR allegations with noted objections.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old senior security consultant employed with a Department 
of Defense contractor. She has worked for her current employer since January 2005. 
She has a Master’s Degree in information technology. She is single. This is her first time 
applying for a security clearance. (Tr at 4-5, 42; Gov 1.)   
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was born in the United States. Her father, a citizen of Iran, and a 
member of the Iranian military attended military training for several years at a U.S. base. 
After he completed training, the family moved back to Iran. Applicant spent her 
formative years in Iran. She was educated in Iran. In 1999, she received her 
undergraduate degree from an Iranian university. Applicant always wanted to move to 
the U.S. She decided to leave Iran after graduating.  She traveled to Germany in 1999. 
Based on the advice received from the Swiss Embassy, she traveled to Germany on her 
Iranian passport. She received her U.S. passport and social security card from the U.S. 
Embassy in Germany.  She stayed in Germany for a few months visiting with her sister 
and two of her aunts, all of whom reside in Germany. She also visited an aunt who 
resides in the United Kingdom. (Tr at 14-16.)  
 
In December 2000, Applicant moved to the U.S.  She found a job two weeks after 
arriving in the United States. She worked full-time and went to graduate school on a 
part-time basis. She purchased a condominium in 2001. She received her Master’s 
Degree in December 2004. (Tr at 59-60; Gov 1; AE E.)  
 
As a U.S. citizen, Applicant sponsored her parents and sister to come to the U.S.  
Her parents moved to the U.S. in 2001. They reside with Applicant when they are in the 
U.S. Her mother is a U.S. permanent resident. Her father became a U.S. citizen in 
March 2007. (Tr at 61-63.) Her father retired from Iranian military in 1993 at the rank of 
General.  He currently works for a car dealership in the U.S. Her mother is a retired high 
school psychology teacher. (Tr at 55-58, 62; Gov 2, question 4.)  Her sister is an Iranian 
citizen who currently works and resides in Germany. She is applying for German 
citizenship. (Tr at 78; Gov 2, questions 10, 31.)  
 
Applicant’s grandparents are citizens of and reside in Iran. She talks to her 
grandparents about once a month. (Tr at 21; Answer to SOR; Gov 2, question 10.) She  
traveled to Iran in 2003, 2004, and 2006 to visit her grandparents. Her visits lasted 
approximately 10 days. Her mother is currently residing in Iran. She lives part of the 
year in the U.S. and the other part of the year in Iran. She travels to Iran in order to care 
for her parents (Applicant’s grandparents.) who are elderly and have health issues. 
When her mother is living in Iran, Applicant talks to her once a week. Applicant’s father 
occasionally travels to Iran as well. (Tr at 20, 64; Gov 2, questions 10, 31.) 
 
Applicant has two maternal uncles who live in Iran. One uncle is an accountant. 
One uncle is retired. He is a permanent resident of the U.S. and lives part of the year in 
Iran and part of the year in the U.S. She has two paternal uncles who live in Iran. One is 
very old. Applicant thinks that he is an artist. The other uncle is a civil engineer. He is 
applying for Canadian citizenship and will be moving to Canada soon. (Tr at 65-71; Gov 
2, question 10.) Her contact with her uncles is limited. She talks with them about once 
or twice a year. She visited with them when she traveled to Iran to visit her 
grandparents. She has a maternal aunt and a paternal aunt who live in Germany and a 
maternal aunt who lives in the United Kingdom. (Tr at 68-70, 73; Gov 2 at 10.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has an Iranian passport which was issued on June 28, 1997. The 
passport expired on June 28, 2002. Applicant renewed the passport on December 8, 
2003, and it expired on June 28, 2007. (Gov 2, copy Iranian passport.) Applicant used 
her Iranian passport when she visited her grandparents in Iran in 2003, 2004 and 2006.  
She used her Iranian passport based on the advice of the U.S. State Department for 
safety reasons.  (Tr at 60; Gov 2, questions 1-5; Admin Not I, attachments 2, 3.) In the 
future, she would like to be able to visit her grandparents in the event of an emergency 
or to attend their funerals. (Tr at 20.)  
 
Applicant gave her expired Iranian passport to her Facility Security Officer (FSO). 
Her passport was placed in her personnel security file. She was advised by the FSO 
that if she requested her passport back, it would be reported to the federal government.   
The FSO states that the company supports Applicant in her request for a security 
clearance. (Tr at 35-36; AE F.)  Applicant testified that it is likely that she will have to 
renew her Iranian passport in order to travel to Iran should something happen to her 
grandparents. (Tr at 75-76.)  
 
Applicant’s second level manager testified on her behalf. Applicant has worked 
for him for two and half years. He interacts with her periodically, probably on a monthly 
basis. On past special projects, he worked with her on a daily basis.  He states that 
Applicant is a top performer within the organization. She is being groomed for more 
responsible positions within the organization. She receives the highest level of 
performance rating within her peer group. She was promoted last year and will be up for 
promotion this year.  (Tr at 40-45; AE D.) 
 
Applicant’s co-worker, who also is a reservist, testified on her behalf. He has 
worked with her on a daily basis for the past two years. He describes her work 
performance as excellent.  He holds a high opinion of her trustworthiness. (Tr at 47-50.) 
Applicant has received numerous favorable comments about her work performance 
from customers, co-workers and superiors. (AE A – C.) 
  
Applicant will not share confidential information. She does not agree with the 
policies of the Iranian government. She owns a condominium in the U.S. and all of her 
assets are here in the U.S.  While growing up in Iran, she always wanted to live in the 
U.S.  She is glad she finally got the opportunity to be here.  She would not be where she 
is today without the freedom that U.S. gave her to use.  She is a loyal U.S. citizen. (Tr at 
27-28.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
 
6 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.    
 
The guideline notes several Foreign Preference Disqualifying Conditions (FP DC) 
that could raise security concerns. The following apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 FP DC ¶10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship 
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through foreign citizenship of a family member. This 
includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport);   
 
FP DC ¶ 10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by 
an American citizen.) 
 
Applicant was born in the U.S., of Iranian parents. Her family moved back to Iran 
when she was a very young child.  Having grown up in Iran, it is apparent that Applicant 
exercised dual citizenship. After moving to the U.S., she exercised dual citizenship by 
applying for an extension of her Iranian passport in 2003 and using her Iranian passport 
to travel to and from Iran. It is noted that Applicant traveled with the Iranian passport for 
safety reasons and based on the advice of the U.S. State Department.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Preference.  Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition (FP 
MC) ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies. Applicant’s passport expired on June 28, 
2007. She surrendered her expired passport to her FSO, the cognizant security 
authority. While Applicant may intend to renew her Iranian passport in the future should 
an emergency happen related to her grandparents, at present, she does not possess a 
valid Iranian passport.   
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference security concerns. Guideline C is 
found for Applicant. 
  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply 
to Applicant’s case. 
 
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC) ¶ 7(c) (contact with a family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion); and FI DC ¶ 7(b) 
(connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group or country by 
providing that information) applies as a result of Applicant’s relatives who are citizens of 
and reside in Iran.  There is a security risk because Applicant’s maternal grandparents 
and mother currently reside in Iran.  Applicant’s mother is currently living in Iran taking 
care of Applicant’s grandparents. It is clear that Applicant is close to her mother. Her 
mother lives with Applicant when she resides in the U.S. Applicant talks to her mother 
once a week when she is living in Iran. She calls her maternal grandparents once a 
month. She visited them in March 2006, December 2004, and August 2003. She intends 
to travel to Iran in the future should an emergency arise involving one of her 
grandparents. She intends to travel to Iran to attend their funerals.  
 
Applicant also has four uncles who are citizens of and reside in Iran. Although 
she only speaks with them once or twice a year, they raise a security concern based on 
Applicant’s family contacts. Her father occasionally travels to Iran as well. Applicant’s 
foreign relatives create a heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is a possibility that Iranian agents may exploit the opportunity to obtain 
intelligence, classified, or economic information about the U.S. A potential conflict is 
created between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and her desire to help her family members, in particular, her mother and grandparents.  
 
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC) & 7(d) (sharing living quarter 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) applies with 
respect to Applicant’s parents. Her parents live with Applicant when they are in the U.S.  
Her mother is a permanent U.S. resident but resides a large part of the year in Iran.  Her 
father is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Iran. Although he retired from the Iranian military 
in 1993, his status as a general officer has the potential to create a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Foreign Influence. Several Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) have the potential to apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 
FIMC ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the position or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.) does not apply. Family contacts and ties with persons in a 
foreign country are not automatically disqualifying but require the applicant to present 
evidence in mitigation and extenuation that he or she qualifies for a security clearance. 
Iran’s hostile relationship with the United States and the country’s poor human rights 
record place “a heavy burden of persuasion on applicant to show his or her family 
members do not pose a security risk.” (See, ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 3 (App.Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2006.) Applicant has not met that burden. She has close ties to her 
grandparents. She acknowledges that she will likely renew her Iranian passport should 
anything happen to  them.  Her mother is currently in Iran taking care of Applicant’s 
grandparents. Although her father is a U.S. citizen, he is a retired general officer of the 
Iranian military. While he has been retired since 1993, his status has the potential to 
raise the level of scrutiny by the Iranian government. Applicant’s family ties in Iran are 
significant enough to raise foreign influence concerns. The risk is heightened due to the 
nature of the Iranian government.      
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest) does not apply.  While Applicant may not have a sense of loyalty or 
obligation to the Iranian government, she does have a sense of obligation to her family 
members who reside in Iran that cannot be described as minimal. She contacts her 
grandparents once a month. She contacts her mother once a week during the time she 
lives in Iran. Her mother lives with Applicant when she lives in the U.S. While Applicant 
has less contact with her uncles who live and reside in Iran, she did visit with them 
when she traveled to Iran to visit her grandparents and speaks with them once or twice 
a year, usually during the holidays. While Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1999, her 
significant ties to relatives living in Iran raise questions as to whether she can resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests.  
 
FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation) is not applicable. Applicant’s relationship with her mother and  
grandparents cannot be considered casual and infrequent.  Although she has limited 
contact with her uncles, speaking to them only once or twice a year, her contact with her 
uncles cannot be described as casual or infrequent.   
 
Applicant has not met her burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Foreign Influence.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is highly thought of by her 
superiors and co-workers. She is considered a top performer by her company and is 
being groomed for advancement. There is no doubt that Applicant has a successful 
career ahead of her. However, Applicant’s outstanding work performance does not 
reduce the very significant security threat raised by Applicant’s family members in Iran. 
The government need not prove an applicant is a bad person before it can deny or 
revoke access to classified information. Even good people can pose a security risk 
because of facts and circumstances not under their control. An applicant with good 
character and personal integrity can pose a security risk because the applicant has 
close relatives in a country that is hostile to the U.S. (ISCR No. 01-26893, at 9-10 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 16, 2002.)  
 
Guideline B is a security concern that can affect Applicants through no fault of 
their own. In fact, under Guideline B, an Applicant’s familial obligations, which are highly 
regarded in other situations, raise security concerns when family members reside in 
another country. The current nature of the Iranian government and the hostile 
relationship between Iran and the U.S. make it a substantial burden to mitigate the 
concerns raised under foreign influence.  Applicant’s favorable work performance and 
contacts within the U.S. do not outweigh the concerns raised by having relatives who 
are citizens of and reside in Iran. Foreign Influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
