1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )         ISCR Case No. 07-16621
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 30 January 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines E and H.  Applicant answered the SOR 11 February 2008, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 9 April 2008, and I convened a hearing 7 May
2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 15 May 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 33-year-old sheet metal foreman
employed by a defense contractor since August 2008. He has not previously held a
clearance.
When Applicant first applied for an industrial clearance in May 2006 (G.E. 1),  he
deliberately concealed his past marijuana use by answering “no” to question 24 (illegal
drug use, last seven years). In fact, he had used marijuana 3-4 times per year from
2000 to summer 2005. Although he acknowledged buying small amounts of marijuana a
“handful” of times, he is only sure of one occasion, but included occasions when it was
just given to him (G.E. 2) In addition, he had previously used marijuana 3-4 times per
year from 1988 to 1992. Applicant initially claimed that he omitted his drug use history
because he considered it inconsequential, but later admitted that he worried he would
not get his clearance, or only complicate things unnecessarily, if he disclosed it.
In February 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator.
Asked by the investigator when he began using marijuana, Applicant stated 2000.
Applicant stated he thought he was only discussing the last seven years (paralleling the
clearance application, but acknowledged that the investigator did not limit the question
to the last seven years.
Applicant stopped using marijuana in summer 2005, because he feared that he
might be caught during random drug screening performed by his employer. He states
an intent to not use marijuana in the future. 
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
¶25.(a) any drug abuse. . .; (c) illegal drug possession, including. . . purchase. . . ;3
4
¶26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶26.(b). a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; . . . (3) an appropriate period5
of abstinence;
6
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .; (b) deliberately providing false or misleading
information regarding facts to an . . . investigator . . .;
3
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H,  and3
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant used marijuana casually for
four years beginning in 1992, stopped using it for eight years, then used for more than
four years beginning in 2000. This use was neither distant in time nor infrequent.  His4
abstinence from drug use—approximately three years—is inadequate to demonstrate
an intent to refrain from drug use in the future given that he had abstained for eight
years before resuming use in 2000.  I cannot conclude Applicant is unlikely to use illegal5
drugs in the future.  Accordingly, I resolve Guideline H against Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. He deliberately concealed his illegal
drug use from the government.  He did so knowing that his illegal drug use was a6
security concern to the government, and believing that his clearance was at risk if he
told the truth.
Further, none of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed
information was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant made no prompt, forthright
4
disclosure of his drug history. Indeed, he misrepresented the full extent of that use in his
February 2007 subject interview.
Applicant’s failure to disclose his illegal drug use demonstrates a lack of candor
required of cleared personnel. The government has an interest in examining all relevant
and material adverse information about an Applicant before making a clearance
decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse
information in a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient.
Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides
some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other
security concerns in the future, something the government relies on to perform damage
assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s conduct
suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government
interests. I resolve Guideline H and E against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
