                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                    )  ISCR Case No. 07-12698 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
 Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns arising under Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (e-QIP), on June 14, 
2007. On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 4, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the response on January 9, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 5, 2008, and I 
received the case assignment on February 14, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on February 21, 2008, scheduling the hearing for March 13, 2008.  The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 21 2008.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing ¶ 1.c., which 
alleged an allegation under 10 U.S.C. § 986. Without objection from Applicant, I granted 
Department Counsel’s motion to withdraw ¶ 1.c. Tr. 7-8. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted in his response to the 
SOR all of the SOR’s allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. He graduated from high school in June 1974, and 
estimates he has completed 95 credit hours towards his bachelor’s degree. Tr. 17, GE 
A. He married his spouse in August 1975. He and his wife have two adult daughters, 
ages 31 and 26. Applicant has been working for his current defense contractor 
employer since June 2007, where he is employed as a facilities manager for information 
technology (IT) services. As such he is responsible for overseeing IT services for 26 
company offices throughout the U.S. Tr. 17, 43. His present company purchased his 
former company where was employed from June 2004 to June 2007 as the senior 
manager of administrative services. Tr. 17, 44-45, GE 1. 
 
 Applicant previously held a security clearance from 1980 to 1994, which was 
initially granted as a secret clearance and upgraded to a top secret clearance. During 
that time-frame, he was employed as his company’s facility security officer from 1986-
1992. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current duties as a facilities 
manager for IT services. Tr. 46-48.  
 
 After getting married in 1975, Applicant went to work for the Post Office as a mail 
carrier. Tr. 34. At the time he was arrested, discussed below, he was on disability after 
sustaining a back injury. Tr. 34-35.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 In November 1977, Applicant was arrested and charged with attempted robbery, 
which was later changed to assault with intent to rob. He was convicted of this charge 
pursuant to his guilty plea in December 1978, and sentenced to eight years 
confinement, of which five years was suspended. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
 In December 1977, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony abduction 
and indecent exposure. He was convicted of these charges pursuant to his guilty pleas 
in April 1978. He was sentenced to eight years confinement for the felony abduction 
charge, of which five years was suspended, and sentenced to twelve months 
confinement for the indecent exposure charge. The sentences for all of these charges 
ran concurrently. He was incarcerated approximately two years as a result of these 
sentences. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) GE 2, GE 3. 
 
 At the time he was arrested, Applicant was 22 years old, on a reduced salary as 
a result of being on disability, and was taking medication for back pain. In November 
1977, he had entered several apartments looking for valuables and was caught by an 
occupant as he attempted to steal a purse. In the course of trying to escape, he threw 
the occupant down and forgot to take the purse in the process. Tr. 37-38. The next 
month in December 1977, he attempted to grab a woman from behind as she was 
getting off an elevator. As noted above, these offenses resulted in two separate arrests. 
 
 Describing his time in prison, Applicant stated: 
 
Well, being away from my family I think was perhaps the most difficult 
thing I’ve ever faced. If a person, when they go to prison – I think you have 
to make a choice, and you have to make a choice that you’re either going 
to turn yourself around, or you’re going to continue to go down the path of 
what you were put there for. And nothing is more eye-opening than a 
reality check of being locked in a cell, being deprived of your rights, being 
deprived of holding your children, holding your wife, or being with the 
people you love. 
 
I swore to myself that I would never go back to jail. That I would totally turn 
my life around, which I think I have. And that I would make a difference. 
Just because you go to jail doesn’t mean that – pardon the phrase – that 
you’re the scum of the earth. People do change. Not everybody who goes 
to prison does, but I made a decision that when I got out that I would be 
different and that I would make it up to my family by being the best that I 
possible could, for myself and for them. Tr. 24-25. 
 
While in prison, Applicant was detailed to housekeeping duties and maintaining 
the grounds. He sometimes worked in the fields harvesting peas and sweet potatoes, 
and fed pigs. Toward the end of his confinement, he was a trustee performing janitorial 
duties and painting the jail. Tr. 42. 
 
To demonstrate his commitment to being the best that he could be, he became a 
model employee, and a committed family man. He was an active member of his local 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Parent Teacher Association, of which he was president for four years, was active in his 
daughters’ Girl Scout Troops for 17 years where he served as a Troop Leader and 
Service Unit Manager, and was involved in a number of community activities such as 
school fund raisers. Tr. 14, 30, 54. Applicant’s wife worked for her state’s department of 
motor vehicle office for 19 years, and resigned about 18 months ago to provide full-time 
care for her aunt who was disabled and recently passed away. Tr. 51-52. Applicant and 
his wife are in the process of purchasing their third home. 
 
Applicant’s older daughter graduated from college and was employed as a social 
worker until she became a stay-at-home mother where she takes care of her two young 
children. Applicant’s younger daughter is attending college full-time and is studying to 
become a teacher. Tr. 50-51.  
 
Applicant submitted four work-related letters of reference, which described 
Applicant as an “exceptional employee,” “performance . . . characterized by capability, 
punctuality, efficiency, thoroughness, and the ability to work with other people who may 
have different priorities,” “hard work,” “dedication and commitment,” “very honest and 
straight forward,” and [b]eing of the highest integrity.” AE B, AE J, AE K, AE L. Applicant 
submitted one personal letter of reference from a former girl scout service unit manager 
who described Applicant as “a loyal and capable worker” whose “commitment never 
wavered.” AE M. Applicant submitted three work performance evaluations from past and 
present employers reflecting above average performance. AE D, AE G, AE I. He also 
submitted 12 certificates of training for various courses he attended spanning his 
working career. AE C, AE E, AE F, AE H. 
 
Appellant emphasized that he has learned from his mistake, and has previously 
held a clearance for 14 years with no other incidents.  Because the personnel close to 
him are aware of the incident, it could not be used to coerce or improperly influence 
him. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”1 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).2 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the 
contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, 
and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
2 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both 
favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in 
light of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met 
his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 
(App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  Pursuant to his guilty pleas, Applicant was convicted of 
assault with intent to rob, felony abduction, and indecent exposure, and served 
approximately two years in prison. These offenses warrant application of AG ¶¶ 31(a) 
and 31(c). 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 31(c) do not apply. Applicant guilty pleas and acceptance of 
responsibility for committing these crimes precludes application of these mitigating 
factors. 
 
However, a review of the facts and available evidence warrants application of AG 
¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d). For the last 28 years since Applicant was released from prison, he 
has been a model citizen. His words of saying he has been successfully rehabilitated 
have been substantiated by action. He has been a model employee, husband, and 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
father. He and his wife have successfully raised two responsible adult daughters, who 
are productive members of society. His employment record supports the notion that he 
has earned the trust and confidence of his employers. Applicant has been placed in 
trusted management positions and earned favorable reviews. Notably, he was 
successfully vetted for a security clearance in 1980. He was granted a clearance initially 
at the secret level, which was later upgraded to the top secret level. He held that 
clearance for 14 years without any reported security violations. 
 
Applicant successfully integrated into his community. He served 17 years with his 
daughters’ Girl Scout Troops in leadership capacities, volunteered in the Parent 
Teacher Association where he served as President, and was involved in other 
community activities. He and his wife are in the process of purchasing their third home. 
He is a responsible and productive member of society as documented by his letters of 
reference, work performance evaluations, and testimonial evidence.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.   
 The evidence weighing against Applicant is the conviction of three serious crimes 
discussed above in 1978. However, since his release from prison 28 years ago, 
Applicant has made every effort to overcome his past record.   
Applicant earned approximately 95 college semester hours. He has been 
gainfully employed since his release from prison 28 years, and has held several 
successful management positions, the most recent being facilities manager for IT 
services. His record of good employment weighs in his favor. This shows responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. He has proven himself as a husband, father, and member 
of the community. Applicant also has a 14-year proven track record of having 
successfully held a security clearance without incident.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
