                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13564 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on January 8, 2006.  On November 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant detailing 
security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 27, 2007.  He admitted the 
factual allegations in the SOR.  He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing.  Department counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on February 20, 2008.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material 
(FORM) on March 14, 2008, and was provided the opportunity to file objections, and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions.  Applicant 
timely submitted additional information in an undated letter received by DOHA on April 
28, 2008.  Department Counsel had no objection to consideration of the additional 
material.  The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2008.  Based on a review of the 
case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel in the FORM asked that administrative notice be taken of 
certain facts concerning Colombia.  I have considered the request and the documents 
provided by Department Counsel.  Administrative notice is taken of the facts as noted 
below in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old radar technician for a defense contractor working at 
remote locations in South America.  He has been employed in this capacity and location 
by defense contractors since January 2001.  He previously served in the United States 
Marine Corps for over five years in a similar occupation specialty.  He held a security 
clearance for most of the time he was on active duty. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated January 8, 
2006) 
 
 Applicant’s wife, mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Colombia.  Applicant’s daughter, born in Colombia in 2004, is a dual citizen of Colombia 
and the United States, and resides with her parents in Colombia.  She is a citizen of the 
United States because she was born of a United States citizen living abroad. (See, 
Citizen Certificate, Answer to FORM) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is an officer in the Colombian Air Force serving as an architect.  
Applicant met his wife while she was assigned as a base facilities engineer. (Item 5, 
Report of Investigation, dated February 26, 2007).  Applicant’s wife has an approved 
resignation from the Colombian Air Force. (See, Applicant’s response to FORM)  
Applicant’s supervisor notes that he knows Applicant’s wife and has no negative 
information concerning her.  He has no reason to doubt Applicant’s loyalty to the United 
States.  The Air Force mission chief overseeing Applicant’s work has known Applicant’s 
wife for over two years and worked several projects with her.  He states she is a trusted 
officer and her character and morale (sic) are solid.  She is highly respected by her 
peers and leaders.  He has full trust and confidence in her.  He has no concerns about 
Applicant’s access to classified information. (Item 3, Applicant’s answer to SOR, Letters 
dated December 26 and December 27, 2007)  Applicant presented no information 
concerning his mother-in-law and father-in-law, except his admission that they are 
residents and citizens of Colombia. 
 
 Colombia is a constitutional democracy with the second largest population in 
South America.  The government generally respects freedom of speech and press, 
freedom of assembly and association, and freedom of religion.  The government has 
 
3 
 
 
improved its respect for human rights, although serious problems remain.  There were 
unlawful and extra-judicial killings, forced disappearances, insubordinate military 
collaboration with criminal groups, and other human rights abuses.  Government steps 
to improve human rights and the security situation showed demonstrated results.   
 
 Illegal armed groups committed the majority of human rights violations, to include 
political killings and kidnappings, force disappearances, and torture.  Colombian based 
terrorists groups were weakened as a result of aggressive actions by Colombian military 
and police but the groups continue to murder, kidnap, and terrorize Colombians from all 
walks of life.  The United States State Department notes that travel to Colombia can 
expose visitors to considerable risk.  There are at least three recognized foreign terrorist 
organizations operating in Colombia.  These groups have carried out bombings and 
other attacks in and around major urban areas, including against civilian targets.  
Kidnappings and murders of journalists, missionaries, scientists, human rights workers, 
business people, tourists, and even small children have taken place.  No one can be 
considered safe from such actions.  The United States Embassy restricts official and 
personal travel of its employees outside of urban areas.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 There is a security concern because foreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in the U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interests.  Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity 
of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is location, 
including but not limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known 
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6) 
 
 Applicant lives in Colombia with his wife and daughter who are citizens and 
residents of Colombia.  Since Applicant’s wife, daughter, and in-laws live in Colombia, it 
is reasonable to assume that there is contact between Applicant and his mother-in-law 
and father-in-law who are citizens and residents of Colombia.  It is unreasonable to 
believe that his in-laws would not visit their daughter and granddaughter.  These 
contacts raise security concerns under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, 
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates 
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion); and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information).  AG ¶ 7(d) (sharing living 
quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship 
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) is 
raised because Applicant lives with his wife and daughter, who are residents and 
citizens of Colombia.  The heightened risk in Colombia is created by the actions of the 
terrorist groups in Colombia. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 The nature of the country in which persons are located is an issue.  Security 
concerns can be raised from countries both friendly and hostile to the United States.  It 
can also be raised because of unlawful or terrorists groups that are active in the 
country.  The United States has an interest in protecting its classified information 
whether the person, organization, or country seeking the information has interests 
inimical to the United States. (ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004)) 
Friendly countries can have disagreements with the United States over matters that are 
vital to the national security of the United States.  Friendly countries have engaged in 
espionage against the United States while seeking economic, scientific, and technical 
information (ISCR Case No. 00-0317 (App. Bd. May 29, 2002)).  The nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its human rights record, and 
the actions and activities of groups operating in the country are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government 
coercion.  The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is dependent on or 
associated with the government, or there are groups known to operate in the country 
and have or will target individual’s to gain intelligence, or other advantages.  While the 
government of Colombia is friendly to the United States and has improved its human 
rights record, the terrorist groups that operate in Colombia create a significant threat 
that raises security concerns.  Because of these groups, Applicant has a heavy burden 
to establish that his contacts with his wife, daughter, and in-laws do not create a 
security concern. 
 
 Applicant is living with his wife and daughter in Colombia.  It is assumed that he 
has frequent and non-casual contact with his in-laws.  He has not raised Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Condition (FI MC) AG ¶ 8(c) (Contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual or infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could created a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation) because his contact with foreign citizens is frequent 
and personal.   
 
 The only information presented by Applicant is that his wife is resigning her 
commission with the Colombian Air Force and the evaluation of his supervisor and the 
mission chief that he is a loyal United States citizen.  He has not presented any 
information concerning the status of his in-laws or why his in-laws, wife, and daughter 
would not be vulnerable to exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion 
by the terrorist groups.  He has not presented information to establish that his 
connection to his family and in-laws in Colombia and the heightened risk created by 
terrorist groups will not create a conflict between his obligation to protect classified 
information and his desire to protect his family.  He has not presented sufficient 
information to raise Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of the U.S.); and 
AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty 
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the 
 
6 
 
 
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that 
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest)  He has failed to meet his heavy burden that his contacts with foreign citizens 
and residents do not create a security concern.  
  
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant served in the United States Marine Corps for over five years, 
successfully held a security clearance, and received favorable evaluations of security 
worthiness from his supervisor and the United State Air Force Chief of Mission.  I 
considered the security situation in Colombia created by terrorist groups and Applicant’s 
failure to present information that his contacts with his foreign resident and citizen family 
members do not create a security concern.  Access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
