 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12551 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on October 2, 2006. On November 15, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On December 10, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
24, 2008. The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on January 25, 2008. 
The case was transferred to me on February 26, 2008. On March 13, 2008, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for April 16, 2008. The hearing was held, as 
scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1-4 without objection. The Applicant offered seven exhibits which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-G without objection. Applicant and his fiancé  
testified at the hearing. The record was held open until April 30, 2008, to allow Applicant 
to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted a seven page document which 
was admitted as AE H without objection. The transcript was received on April 24, 2008. 
The record closed on April 30, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On January 24, 2008, the Government submitted a motion to amend the SOR.  
The motion to amend consisted of clarifications to SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.k, and 1.l.  
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.j were withdrawn.  A new allegation under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, SOR ¶ 2.a was added. At the start of the hearing the motion to amend was 
granted with no objections from Applicant. (Tr at 15.) The amendments to the SOR are 
attached to the original SOR. The SOR was also amended to reflect Applicant’s first 
name. Applicant had his name legally changed on July 25, 2007. (Tr at 5; AE G.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.g, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k.  He denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.l, 1.m, and 
2.a.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has worked for his current employer for the past three 
years as a computer operator. (Tr at 6-7) He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force 
from April 21, 1993, to April 25, 2005. He separated with an honorable discharge at the 
rank of Senior Airman (E-4). (AE C.) He held a security clearance for 12 years while on 
active duty in the Air Force.  He has a high school education. He is engaged to be 
married.  He and his fiancé have an eight-month-old son. He has a 12-year-old son from 
a prior marriage who currently resides with him. He also has a 12-year-old daughter 
from a prior relationship. His daughter lives with her mother who is on active duty in the 
military. (Tr at 6, 46-48; Gov 1.)   
 
On October 2, 2006, Applicant filed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He answered, “No” in response to question 28(a) “In the last 7 
years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He also answered, 
“No” in response to question 28(b) “Are you currently 90 day(s) delinquent on any 
debt(s)?” (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed Applicant had the following  
delinquent accounts:   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: a $285 account placed for collection in October 2001 (Gov 2 at 16-
17; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 2; AE B at 3);  
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: a $1,390 account placed for collection in January 2004 (Gov 2 at 11 
Gov 3 at 3-4; Gov 4 at 4; AE B at 3-4);  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: a $4,326 delinquent Air Force Club account placed for collection in 
April 2001 (Gov 2 at 12, 15; Gov 3 at 3);  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: a $4,449 delinquent collection account placed for collection in 
February 2004 (Gov 2 at 13; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 4; AE B at 4.);  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: a $1,336 delinquent collection account placed for collection in May 
2005 (Gov 2 at 4, 16; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 4; AE B at 2); 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: a $921 credit card account charged off in September 2002 (Gov 3 at 
2; Gov 4 at 3.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: a $1,163 department store account, charged off in January 2004 
(Gov 2 at 6, 13; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 3; AE B at 2.);  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: a $798 delinquent account charged off in October 2002 (Gov 3 at 2; 
Gov 4 at 3; AE B at 3.); 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: an $823 credit card account placed for collection in May 2001 (Gov 2 
at 4.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: an $823 account placed for collection in May 2001.  This is a  
duplicate entry of SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: a $1,067 delinquent account placed for collection in January 2002 
(Gov 2 at 7; AE B at 3.);   
 
SOR ¶ 1.l: a $223 delinquent dental bill placed for collection in November 2002 
(Gov 2 at 8, 16; Gov 4 at 2; AE B at 3.); 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m: a $158 delinquent cell phone account placed for collection in 
December 2002 (Gov 2 at 16; AE B at 2.). 
 
Applicant claims that he began to encounter financial problems between 1995 
and 1997 as a result of poor financial decisions when he was younger. He charged too 
much on his credit cards and was unable to pay the bills. He was not earning much 
money and had two young children to support.  He also went through a divorce in May 
2001.  He states that for the past two years he has paid his current bills on time. (Tr at 
34, 40-41, 47, 59, 74; Gov 1, section 13/15.)  
  
Applicant paid off the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k in November 2005. (Tr at 36; AE 
A.)  He disputes the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l because he claims it is a dental bill for 
his 12-year-old daughter which should be covered by her active duty mother’s military 
 
4 
 
 
health benefits. (Tr at 36.) He admits all of the debts are his. He disputes the balance 
owed on the debts. (Tr at 49.) He is willing to resolve his remaining delinquent debts. He 
has not made any attempts to resolve the remaining delinquent accounts because he 
did not have the money to offer settlements. (Tr at 44-45, 49-50.)  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g are the same account. Note the same 
account number.  The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g was sold to the collection agency listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.b. (AE B at 2-4).  SOR ¶¶ 1.g is found in favor of Applicant.  
 
Applicant separated from the Air Force due to a reduction in force. In 2000, he 
was reduced from Staff Sergeant (E-5) to Senior Airman (E-4) as a result of an Article 
15 nonjudicial punishment for Driving While Under the Influence. (Tr at 65,70; Gov 1, 
section 23.) He received $28,192 in separation pay when he separated on April 25, 
2005. When asked whether he applied any of the money towards his delinquent 
accounts, Applicant stated taxes took a portion of the money. He used the money to live 
on during the three months he was unemployed after separating from the Air Force. (Tr 
at 70-72; AE C.) 
 
Applicant states that he did not intend to falsify his e-QIP application. He initially 
testified that he was not aware of any delinquent accounts until he looked at his credit 
report. (Tr at 14, 37.) Under cross examination, he admits that he was aware that he 
had some debts at the time he completed his e-QIP application and should have 
indicated he had some delinquent debts on his e-QIP application. He was not aware of 
the full extent of his delinquent accounts. In the future, he will be more proactive in 
providing this information. (Tr at 51-53.)  
 
In 2004, Applicant’s fiancé bought a house. She refinanced her mortgage eight 
months ago and put Applicant’s name of the house. (Tr at 87-88.) She just recently 
returned to work after giving birth to their son. (Tr at 56.) Their combined monthly 
income is $2,088.  Their monthly expenses consist of a $626 mortgage payment; a 
$412 truck payment; $110 car insurance; $140 gas; $100 utilities; $300 groceries.  They 
pay a total of $125 towards four credit card accounts. Their total monthly expenses are 
$1,813.69.  After expenses, they have $274.31 left over in discretionary income. (AE H 
at 1-2.) Applicant also pays $275 per month in child support. It is unclear whether this is 
taken out of his paycheck through an allotment or if this is an additional expense. (Tr at 
55.)   
 
When he was on active duty, Applicant received numerous awards and 
decorations, including the Air Force Commendation Medal, National Defense Service 
Medal with Bronze Star, the Air Force Longevity Service Medal with two oak leaf 
clusters. (AE C; AE F; AE H at 5.) He was nominated for Airman of the Quarter for July- 
September 1999 (AE E.) From March 2004 to June 2004, he deployed to the Middle 
East in support of Operation ENDURING FREEDOM, Operation IRAQI FREEDOM, and 
Combined Joint Task Force Horn of Africa.  He won a Desert Warrior Award for his 
dedicated efforts while deployed and received an outstanding evaluation. (AE D; AE H 
at 6.)  
 
5 
 
 
 
In his current job, Applicant was Employee of the Quarter for July – September 
2007. (AE H at 3.) Applicant’s fiancé testified that she has known him for six years. She 
is helping him resolve his past debts. He is very good worker, a great person, an 
awesome dad, and a good boyfriend. He has matured. (Tr at 76-85.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting 
financial obligations. He incurred ten delinquent accounts with a total approximate 
balance of $14,978. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Although Applicant maintains he is current on his recent debts, aside from one account 
he took no steps to resolve any of the delinquent accounts. Most of these accounts 
became delinquent between 2001 to 2004. When he separated from active duty in April 
2005, he received over $28,000 in separation pay. He had the opportunity to resolve a 
lot of the accounts at that time but did nothing. Questions remain about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment based on his lack of action towards resolving his 
delinquent accounts.   
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant states most of his 
financial problems were the result of financial irresponsibility as opposed to conditions 
that were beyond his control.  He experienced some expenses in 2001 when he 
 
7 
 
 
divorced his first wife. However, most of the accounts became delinquent after 2001. 
Applicant’s separation from the Air Force cannot be considered a factor. Although he 
was unemployed for three months, his expenses were covered by his separation pay. In 
fact, it is likely Applicant had money left over from his separation pay which could have 
been applied towards his delinquent accounts.     
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant received financial counseling in 1999 while on active 
duty. He has no recent financial counseling. His financial situation is not under control. 
Nine delinquent accounts remain unresolved. It is unlikely that his financial situation will 
be under control in the near future based on the budget Applicant submitted after the 
hearing.  After expenses, Applicant has a little over $200 left over each month. This is 
not enough to resolve his delinquent accounts and account for unanticipated expenses.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.k because he submitted proof that he paid the debt. It does not apply with regard to 
his remaining delinquent accounts due to his lack of effort in resolving these accounts.  
 
Applicant did not mitigate the concerns raised under financial considerations. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent accounts in response to questions 28(a) and 28(b) on his e-QIP application. 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 17(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies. Applicant initially stated that 
he was not aware that he had delinquent debts. He later testified that he was aware that 
he had some delinquent accounts prior to filling out his e-QIP application. He admitted 
that he should have answered “yes” to questions 28(a) and 28(b). He did not have a 
recent credit report and was not aware of the full extent of the delinquent accounts. I 
find Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP application. He was aware that he had 
 
8 
 
 
some delinquent accounts and should have indicated that he had delinquent accounts 
on his e-QIP application. None of the mitigating conditions apply under personal 
conduct. I find against Applicant with respect to the personal conduct concern.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
career, including his deployments and awards and decorations. I considered the 
testimony of his fiancé. However, Applicant’s financial situation and his lack of candor 
related to his delinquent debts on his e-QIP application remain security concerns. He 
resolved one out of the ten delinquent accounts. Although he testified that he intends to 
pay off the delinquent accounts in the future, his budget reveals that he has very little 
income left over each month to apply towards these delinquent accounts. Security 
concerns remain under financial considerations. Security concerns remain under the 
personal conduct concern related to his deliberate lack of candor regarding his 
delinquent debts on his e-QIP application. Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the concerns raised under the financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
