DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxxx Xxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 07-18513
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire
Deputy Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Raeka Safai, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 8 October 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F and E.  Applicant answered the SOR 21 November 2008, requesting a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 3 February 2009, and I convened a hearing 24
March 2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 31 March 2009.
 
Record evidence suggests that SOR 1.c. and 1.h. are the same debt. Accordingly, I find 1.h. for Applicant2
to avoid duplication of findings.
Indeed, one of the witnesses Applicant called to document the circumstances of the incident that precipitated3
his firing was also the reporting officer on some of the documented misconduct that supported his firing.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the financial allegations of SOR 1.a., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.j., 1.k.,
1.q., and 1.r., and the personal conduct allegations of 2.b., 2.c., and 2.j. He denied the
remaining SOR allegations. He is a 42-year-old operations manager employed by a
defense contractor since January 2007. He seeks to retain the security clearance he
has held as needed since at least 2001.
The SOR alleges, and government exhibits confirm, 17 delinquent debts  totaling2
just over $49,000. Applicant admitted seven debts totaling over $23,000. He also
admitted being involved in bankruptcy proceedings between June 1992 and June 1993,
when he received a complete chapter 7 discharge of his dischargeable debts.
 Despite his bankruptcy discharge in June 1993, Applicant has continued to have
financial problems. He attributes these problems to periods of unemployment,
underemployment, and his wife’s unemployment. Additionally, he has been divorced
twice and the financial pressures of that process and the concomitant child support
orders have inhibited his ability to stay current on his accounts. When he married for the
third time in November 2005, both he and his wife brought delinquent debt to the
marriage.
Applicant has been employed, at varying levels of authority, as a security guard
for many years. He generally works two jobs in order to earn sufficient income to
support his family. Security work is a profession that frequently involves high turnover
rates among personnel, wages that generally require an individual to work two or more
jobs to make ends meet, cycles of layoffs when the employer loses the government
contract that employs it, and regular rehiring of former employees—regardless of the
reason the employee left the company.
Over the years, Applicant has been subject to the vicissitudes of his profession.
On four occasions, he has been fired or removed from the agency work site because of
recorded misconduct: September 2000 (removed), October 2002 (fired), March 2004
(fired), and April 2007 (fired). In each of these instances, Applicant has a version of
events that conflicts with the employers’ version, but does not dispute that the adverse
action was taken by the employer. And while Applicant denies or minimizes the specific
incident that precipitated each adverse action, the record evidence reflects that each
adverse action was based in part on other misconduct documented by the employer.3
When Applicant completed a public trust questionnaire in November 2005 and
March 2006 (GE 2), he failed to disclose the adverse employment actions in September
3
2000, October 2002, and March 2004. He also failed to disclose numerous delinquent
debts. When Applicant applied for a security clearance in October 2005 (GE 1),  he
concealed the same information. Although he denied any intent to mislead the
government, he admitted that he knew he was fired from several positions and that he
was required to disclose that fact (Tr. 258-260). 
Regarding the October 2005 clearance application, he also claimed to rely on the
advice of his facility security officer who allegedly told him to answer “no” to the
pertinent questions (because a “yes” answer required explanation and Applicant did not
have the details immediately available to him) and explain it during the later subject
interview. However, he also admitted that this was not the first time he had applied for a
clearance, and he knew he was required to give truthful answers to the questions. In
addition to his failure to disclose adverse information on his public trust and clearance
documents, Applicant also failed to provide releases required to facilitate his
background investigation between June-August 2006. He explained that he did not
mean to be uncooperative, but was consumed by the press of other business.
At hearing, Applicant provided evidence that he had been making regular
payments on the child support obligations at SOR 1.e. and 1.q. He was not making
payments on the large judgment against him in SOR 1.a. The remainder of his debts he
was addressing through a credit firm he began working with in December 2007.
Although the program includes some counseling and education on developing good
financial habits, including a budget, the firm advertises itself as a credit repair operation.
On the advice of the program representative, he has been advised to make no
payments on any of his delinquent accounts—not because the debts are not his or he
does not owe the money, but because the program seeks to have the accounts
removed from Applicant’s credit reports based on the time the accounts have been
inactive. In this fashion, Applicant has succeeded in removing some accounts that he
claims are not his and a number of accounts that he acknowledges owing. Some
accounts have not had responses from the credit agency. 
Once he has had as many accounts removed from his credit report as he can, he
will make arrangements to repay the remaining creditors. Several of the accounts that
no longer appear on his credit report are accounts that the credit reporting agencies
confirmed as valid debts in Applicant’s name. However, Applicant confirmed that a
current credit report would show new delinquencies not alleged in the SOR, at least one
of which is a default on an instant loan Applicant obtained to deal with short-term cash
flow issues (Tr. 278).
Applicants witnesses consider him a reliable and trustworthy individual who
should have his clearance. Similarly, his work and character references (AE M)
recommend him for his clearance. However, it does not appear that any of them are
aware of the issues in this case.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶ 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible5
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan
to pay the debt; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; . . . (e) consistent spending beyond one’s
means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
4
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial commonsense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guidelines
F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Although Applicant obtained a
complete discharge of his dischargeable debt in June 1993, he has been unable to get,
and keep, his financial house in order.  To some extent, this has been due to5
circumstances beyond his control with his divorces and periods of unemployment,
underemployment, and his wife’s unemployment. However, to the extent that his
periods of unemployment or underemployment were due to adverse employment
actions occasioned by his misconduct, his financial problems were not due to
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20.(c)the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that8
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
5
circumstances beyond his control. Further, there is one major debt (SOR 1.a.) that
Applicant acknowledges but has not addressed in any fashion. In addition, he continues
to acquire new delinquent debt.  Finally, although the credit repair program Applicant
entered may be lawful, it is not responsible. It remains to be seen what debts are
eventually removed from his credit reports and what debts will be repaid, it is
incomplete. Unlike an established repayment plan, or a plan to address debts serially,
there is no reasonable certainty that Applicant will resolve his delinquent debts, much
less when that might be accomplished. This is a plan to avoid his debts, not resolve
them.
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  The debts were not entirely due to6
circumstances beyond his control, and he has not acted responsibly in addressing his
debts.  The credit repair program he entered does not really involve credit counseling ,7
and as he is still in the middle of that program he cannot be said to have otherwise
brought the problem under control.  As he has not made any payments to his creditors,8
including the judgment creditor that falls outside his credit repair program, he has not
made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.9
Further, given his selection of a program that is not designed to address his
debts but only to avoid them, there is nothing in the record to suggest that Applicant will
put his financial problems behind him. The government’s documents adequately
establish Applicant’s responsibility for most of the debts in the SOR. Despite the denials
in his answer, he had previously admitted and acknowledged at hearing, his legal
responsibility for the debts. Thus, he had the burden to establish that he had resolved
the debts or had a legitimate reason to dispute them. He did neither. I conclude
Guideline F against Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s employment adventures
raise serious security concerns. Distilled to its essence, Applicant’s misconduct
demonstrates a consistent pattern of poor judgment. He has been unable or unwilling to
follow basic commonsense requirements in the workplace. Compounding these
examples of poor judgment is his inability or unwillingness to see that these incidents
demonstrate poor judgment—in itself a demonstration of poor judgment or poor
¶ 16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse10
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information; (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. . . ;
¶ 16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel11
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification12
before being confronted with the facts;
6
perception.  In his mind, none of these incidents are really his fault, even partially. It10
may be that one or more of these incidents were due to petty jealousies or co-
worker/supervisor incompetence. But when an individual is removed from a work site or
fired four times in seven years, the credibility of such claims diminishes. Further,
Applicant was over 34 years old when this misconduct began, hardly an age where the
conduct might be attributed to youthful immaturity.
In addition to his adverse employment actions, the government also established
a case for disqualification under Guideline E, because of his falsifications on trust
position and clearance documents. He deliberately concealed his financial
delinquencies and his adverse employment from the government.  He did so knowing11
that these issues were of security concern to the government. His claim that he relied
on the advice of his FSO is not credible given that Applicant had previously completed
similar documents and knew the requirement for full disclosure. Further, there is no
evidence that Applicant revealed this adverse information before being confronted with
it. Finally, he hindered his background investigation by failing to execute required
releases in a timely fashion.
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not disclose this adverse information
until his subject interview.  Applicant’s failure to disclose this information demonstrates12
a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The government has an interest in
examining all relevant and material adverse information about an Applicant before
making a clearance decision. The government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose
that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be
prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information
about himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
7
Beyond the specific guidelines alleged by the government, the generally
applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions (whole person) lead to the same
result. Falsifications and finances are core security concerns [RAG &2(a)(1)]. His
behavior was deliberate and not due to circumstances beyond his control [RAG
&2(a)(2); RAG &2(a)(5)]. His misconduct was both recent and frequent [RAG &2(a)(3)].
Applicant is a mature adult and although his financial problems began when he was in
his twenties, those problems persist and his falsifications and employment issues
cannot be excused by claims of youthful immaturity [RAG &2(a)(4).)]. Rehabilitation or
behavioral changes are difficult to measure under these circumstances [RAG & 2(a)(6)].
He clearly sought to mislead the government about his financial and employment
records, or was at least willing to benefit from his misconduct [RAG &2(a)(7)].
Applicant’s willingness to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government
interests increases his potential vulnerability and he has not demonstrated that the
misconduct is unlikely to recur [RAG & 2(a)(8); RAG & 2(a)(9)]. The concern is whether
Applicant would disclose situations or circumstances, whether deliberated or
inadvertent, that raise security concerns and whether he will be able to exercise
consistent control over his finances. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial
doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his falsifications
and financial problems.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f-p Against Applicant
Subparagraph q: For Applicant
Subparagraph r. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-j: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
8
Administrative Judge
