  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------  )
SSN: ------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 07-14490
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James E. Watson, Personal Representative
 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 17, 2009, and then amended it on
April 15, 2009. The amendment to the SOR adds a security guideline as SOR ¶ 2, and
in SOR ¶ 2.a it refers to the information previously alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.d. The
 Exhibit 5 is a copy of the state statute addressing setting aside a judgment of a convicted person.2
2
SOR, as amended, is equivalent to an administrative complaint and it details the factual
basis for the action. The issues here fall under Guideline E for personal conduct and
Guideline H for drug involvement. 
Applicant replied to the SOR on March 17, 2009, and then to the amendment on
May 1, 2009. She requested a hearing, which took place on June 3, 2009. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on June 11, 2009. For the reasons discussed below, this
case is decided against Applicant.
Findings of Fact
Applicant replied to the SOR, as amended, as follows: (1) she admitted a 1983
state criminal conviction for theft of property of a value of more than $100 but less than
$250; (2) she admitted a 1992 state criminal conviction for possession of cocaine; (3)
she admitted using cocaine and marijuana in May 1992; and (4) she admitted
termination from employment due to failing a random drug test in April 2006 when she
tested positive for cocaine, but she maintained it was due to a false positive. Based on
the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence.
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a federal contractor. Hired in 2007 to work
as a custodian, she was recently promoted to a material specialist (Exhibit D). She has
lived in the same community for 45 years and at the same address since 1988. She has
been married to her current spouse since 1997. She is seeking to obtain a security
clearance for her employment with a company engaged in defense contracting. 
In March 1983, a state court convicted Applicant of theft of property of more than
$100 but less than $250, which stemmed from her November 1982 arrest for second-
degree burglary, theft over $1,000, and theft over $100. She was sentenced to
probation for two years. In September 1984, the state court set aside the conviction and
judgment, released her from all penalties, and restored her civil rights under state law
(Exhibit A).2
In September 1992, a state court convicted Applicant of possession of narcotics
(cocaine), which stemmed from her May 1992 arrest for possession of narcotics and
driving under the influence of alcohol. She had approximately 132 milligrams of cocaine
in her possession (Exhibit 3 at 2). She was sentenced to probation for two years and
ordered to pay a sizable fine. Besides alcohol, Applicant had used cocaine and
marijuana before her arrest. She completed her probation, and in March 2000 the state
court set aside the conviction and judgment, released her from all penalties, and
restored her civil  rights under state law (Exhibit B).
Applicant was working as a maintenance technician in April 2006 when she was
required to submit to random drug testing (Exhibits 2 and C). She tested positive for
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
3
cocaine metabolites. Based on the positive test result, her employer terminated
Applicant effective April 12, 2006, due to violating company policy. In turn, Applicant
informed the company that she doubted the result and believed it was a false positive
based on over-the-counter medications she was then taking. In a letter dated April 25,
2006, the company’s human-resources manager informed Applicant of the following: (1)
that the termination decision stood; (2) that Applicant failed to inform the company or
the sample-collection provider in advance of any medications that could result in a
positive drug test; and (3) a certified scientist/toxicologist at the lab reviewed the list of
medicines Applicant claimed she was taking and confirmed that they would not cause a
positive test result. Thereafter, Applicant did not contest the matter because she did not
have the means to do so. Instead, she elected to move on with her life. After a short
period of unemployment and a job working as kitchen help, she began her current
employment about one year later.
Before starting her new job, she completed a security-clearance application in
March 2007 (Exhibit 1). In it, she disclosed her record of criminal conduct as well as her
job termination due to the positive drug test. Also, she noted that her request for a
second test was denied, and she asserted that the positive drug test was due to using
over-the-counter drugs. In addition to the security-clearance application, Applicant was
required to undergo pre-employment drug screening, and the results were negative.  
Applicant described herself as a recovering alcoholic (Tr. at 60). She maintains
she has not used illegal drugs since May 1992, and she has abstained from alcohol
since August 1995 (Exhibit 3 at 4). Alcohol was her chief problem, and her illegal drug
use stemmed from poor judgment when she was using alcohol. 
Applicant presented several letters from individuals vouching for her good
character (Exhibits E, F, and G).  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant4
to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes any5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 The nine factors of the whole-person concept are set forth in the Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
4
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept.  A person granted access to classified13
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and m itigating15
conditions).  
 Revised Guidelines at 10.16
5
Analysis
Except for the 1983 theft conviction in SOR ¶ 1.e—which is decided for
Applicant due to passage of time without recurrence—the SOR allegations are the
same under each guideline. But before addressing the security concerns under the
guidelines, it is necessary to decide a threshold issue. 
The central or overarching issue is Applicant’s claim that her 2006 positive drug
test was due to a false positive. After careful review of the documentary evidence and
having had an opportunity to listen to Applicant’s testimony and observe her demeanor,
that claim is decided against Applicant due to lack of proof. She did not present credible
and reliable evidence to rebut or explain the 2006 positive drug test. For example, she
did not present evidence from a certified scientist, toxicologist, or other qualified
individual to support her false-positive claim. Likewise, she did not present persuasive
evidence that her sample’s collection or testing or both were faulty. Also, her false-
positive claim is undermined by her admitted past possession and use of cocaine.  
Taken together, Applicant’s use of marijuana and cocaine, her drug-related
criminal conduct, and her job termination due to testing positive for cocaine raise
security concerns under both guidelines and call into question her judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. The particular concerns are set forth below.
1. The Personal Conduct Security Concern
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and15
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  16
The pertinent DC under the guideline is as follows:
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
 Revised Guidelines at 10. 17
 Under the whole-person concept, it is proper to consider, among other things, (1) the presence or absence18
of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes, and (2) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating19
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 20
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 21
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 22
 Under the whole-person concept, it is proper to consider, among other things, (1) the presence or absence23
of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes, and (2) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.17
This DC applies against Applicant because her use of marijuana and cocaine,
her drug-related criminal conduct, and her job termination due to testing positive for
cocaine, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.d, support a whole-person concept of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations. I reviewed and considered the MC under the guideline, but conclude that
none apply. Specifically, given that I rejected her false-positive claim as an explanation
for the 2006 positive drug test, I cannot accept as true Applicant’s contention that she
no longer engages in drug abuse.  Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against18
Applicant. 
2. The Drug Involvement Security Concern
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that “use of an19
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.”  The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal20
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”21
The pertinent DCs are drug abuse, testing positive for illegal drug use, and illegal
drug possession.  I reviewed and considered the MC under the guideline, but conclude22
that none apply. Specifically, given that I rejected her false-positive claim as an
explanation for the 2006 positive drug test, I cannot accept as true Applicant’s
contention that she no longer engages in drug abuse.  Accordingly, Guideline H is23
decided against Applicant. 
7
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines E and H. Applicant did
not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In
reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept (to include her favorable character
evidence) was given due consideration and it does not support a favorable decision.
This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
