1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-00500
SSN:                 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised under
Guidelines J, criminal conduct, and D, sexual behavior. Clearance is denied.
On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
J and D. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2008, and requested an
administrative determination. On December 31, 2008, department counsel prepared a
File of Relevant Materials (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on March 4, 2009,
2
and prepared a response on April 9, 2009. The case was assigned to me on April 22,
2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old man with one adult child. Two previous marriages
ended in divorce. His highest level of education is unknown from the record. He served
in the Air Force from 1980 to 1988 (Item 4 at 26). Applicant received a general
discharge under other than honorable conditions after being court-martialed for
ingesting an illegal substance (Id.). 
Since at least 1999, Applicant has worked as a commercial truck driver. He has
worked for the same trucking company since 2002 (Item 4 at 11-13).
One day on or about December 1, 2000, the phone rang while Applicant was in
the shower. He left the shower without clothing himself, and answered the phone in
another room. The blinds on his second-story apartment window were open, and he
was visible to passers-by (Item 5 at 4-5). Later, after he dressed, a police officer came
to the door, and told him that a neighborhood child had seen him standing naked in the
window. The officer then arrested and charged him with indecent exposure to a child
(Item 6 at 2; Item 5 at 5). 
Applicant remained in jail for four to five days after the arrest. His son then
posted bail, and he was released. Later, Applicant pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of
indecent exposure, a misdemeanor. The FORM contains conflicting evidence
concerning whether Applicant was subsequently sentenced. Although Applicant
attended counseling after the arrest, it is unclear from the record whether he attended
voluntarily or whether he attended as part of a court sentence. The record is also silent
as to the nature of the counseling, what Applicant learned from the counseling, and any
favorable prognosis resulting from the counseling.
In 1993, Applicant, while at a fast food restaurant, exposed himself to a female
customer who was seated at a table (Item 6 at 3; Item 5 at 5). He was arrested and
charged with public indecency. Subsequently, he was found guilty. The court deferred
adjudication for one year, fined him $100, and ordered him to attend counseling (Item 6
at 2). It is unclear from the record whether he attended the counseling, as ordered, and
if so, the nature of the counseling.
In 1989, Applicant was arrested and charged with indecent exposure. The
disposition of the case is unknown from the record.
In 1981, Applicant was the subject of a police investigation concerning indecent
exposure incidents that had occurred in his apartment complex. The FORM contains no
record of the investigation’s outcome. In 1980, Applicant was arrested and charged with
indecent exposure (Item 3). The record contains no evidence of the case’s disposition.
3
Applicant acknowledges that he has had sexual behavior problems in the past.
He believes that the counseling he attended in 2001 helped him get his problems under
control (Id.). Since then, he has had no further episodes of exhibitionism (Id.).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (Id.). 
SOR subparagraph 1.a merely alleges that Applicant was arrested and charged
with indecent exposure. Applicant admits being charged, and the charge is listed in a
Federal Bureau of Investigation identification record (Item 5). Absent a police report or
any evidence of the disposition of this charge, however, I cannot adequately evaluate
whether the underlying crime occurred. SOR subparagraph 1.a is resolved in
Applicant’s favor.
4
SOR subparagraph 1.b merely alleges that Applicant was investigated regarding
some indecent exposure incidents. The FORM contains neither any evidence of the
investigation’s outcome, nor any other details about the investigation. Moreover, it
contains no evidence of the circumstances surrounding the incident. Given the
vagueness of the allegation and its age, I did not draw any negative security inferences
from it. SOR subparagraph 1.b is resolved in favor of Applicant. 
The government does not have to establish that an applicant was convicted to
sustain an allegation of criminal conduct. However, at minimum, the government must
support its allegations with some evidence that the alleged crime occurred. SOR
subparagraph 1.c, like SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b, does not meet this minimum
threshold; therefore, it is resolved in Applicant’s favor.
Nevertheless, the remaining episodes of indecent exposure, as set forth in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant, are sufficient to trigger the application of AG ¶ 31(a), “a
single serious crime, or multiple lesser offenses.”
Applicant’s most recent offense occurred nearly nine years ago, and the earlier
episode occurred nearly 16 years ago. The nature of Applicant’s behavior may be
indicative, however, of a behavioral disorder. Consequently, absent any comprehensive
evidence regarding the counseling he received in 2001, I cannot adequately gauge the
possibility of the behavior’s recurrence. Also, Applicant provided no evidence of any
positive factors demonstrating rehabilitation such as good job performance or
community involvement that could conceivably bolster his case. Consequently, despite
the time that has elapsed since the last offense, I conclude none of the mitigating
conditions are applicable. 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the criminal conduct security concern.
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
Under this guideline, “sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 12). Applicant’s behavior triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 13(a),
“sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been
prosecuted,” 13(c), “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress,” and 13(d), “sexual behavior . . . that reflects a lack of
discretion or judgment.”
None of the mitigating conditions apply for the same reasons set forth in the
criminal conduct paragraph, above. Applicant has not mitigated the sexual behavior
security concern.
5
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Applicant’s criminal conduct was infrequent, and resulted in minor judicial
penalties, if any. The most recent offense occurred nearly nine years ago. The nature of
the conduct, however, reflects a serious lack of judgment and discretion, and may be
indicative of a behavioral disorder. I was particularly troubled by the 1993 episode of
indecent exposure which occurred inside a restaurant. Under these circumstances,
Applicant’s participation in counseling represents a positive effort at rehabilitation, but
absent any specific details, does not outweigh the security concerns. After evaluating
this case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has failed to
mitigate the security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
