 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07918
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 30, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 8, 2008.  On March 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 (as amended), and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the reasons why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 6, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on May 7, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on May 27, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for June 30, 2009.  The Government offered four exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection.
Applicant called one witness, offered two exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A and
B, and testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
 
2
July 9, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 51 years old and has Bachelor’s Degrees in Electrical
Engineering and Math, and a Master’s of Science in Computer Science.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Senior Hardware Engineer, and is applying for a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations that raise questions about his ability to protect classified
information.   
Paragraph 2 (Guideline M - Use of Information Technology Systems).  The Government
alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because his
noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining to
information technology systems may raise security concerns about an individual’s
reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness or ability to properly
protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.
Paragraph 3 (Guideline D - Sexual Behavior).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because his sexual behavior
involved a criminal offense, is indicative of a personality or emotional disorder, reflects
lack of judgment or discretion, or may subject the individual to undue influence or
coercion, or reflects lack of judgment or discretion.  
The Applicant admits to the allegations set forth in the SOR under the respective
guidelines set forth above.  Those admissions are deemed findings of fact.
The Applicant began working for defense contractor #1 in March 1984.  While
employed for contractor #1, the Applicant used the company computer to access
pornographic adult web sites during company time on a sporadic basis from October
2000 through 2005.  In October 2000, the Applicant received a letter of reprimand for
this violation.
Again, from November 2004 through March 2005, the Applicant used contractor
#1's computer to access and download non-business related internet web pages while
employed there.  After twenty-one years of employment with this defense contractor, in
March 2005, in lieu of being terminated for the inappropriate use of the internet and mis-
 
3
charging of time against the Government contract shop orders, the Applicant resigned
from his position at the company. 
From March 2005 through August 2005, the Applicant was unemployed.  During
that time, he states that he consulted with some experts in the area of job search who
told him not to fully disclose why he was terminated, but to use a three step approach.
The Applicant testified that, “The first, when I was asked what was the reason for
leaving, I would respond, I left for personal reasons.  If they wanted more information
than that, they would ask in which case I would say the HR had issues with me that
were not related to my performance and if they still had, they wanted to know more then
I would give them the details which would have been telling them about violation of
company policy with regards to use of the computers.”  (Tr. p. 31).
Applicant indicates that while interviewing for a job, some defense contractors
asked all three questions and so he disclosed all of the details.  Other potential
employers only asked the first question, so he never revealed the full details. 
On his June 2005 application for employment with defense contractor #2, the
Applicant failed to disclose the circumstances of his previous employment termination.
Applicant simply stated that he terminated his employment with a previous defense
contractor because of personal issues with Human Resources.  He failed to disclose
that he resigned from his position in lieu of being terminated due to his improper use of
the company’s computer.  Applicant testified that in responding to the question on his
application for employment, the space only allowed a few words.  He was not trying to
mislead the company; and had they asked, he would have provided a more thorough
explanation.
In August 2005, while employed with defense contractor #2, the Applicant used
his company computer to visit web sites that could be construed as borderline
pornographic, against company policy.  Applicant was aware at the time that he was
violating company policy by visiting these pornographic or borderline pornographic web
sites, but at the time did not realize that he was battling an addiction.
The Applicant testified that he has been working on his disorder since 1993.  (Tr.
p. 69).  It took until March 2009, for him to realize that he is addicted to internet
pornography.  (Tr. p. 36).  Prior to March 2009, he had been discussing the problem
with his pastor at his church, but realized that he needed deeper counseling.  Applicant
testified that even though he had the motivation and will power to stop internet
pornography, he wanted and needed to figure out for himself why he was engaging in
this conduct.  (Tr. p. 37).  
In April 2009, he began seeing a licensed social worker on a weekly basis and
plans to continue indefinitely.  (Tr. p. 70).  Since then the Applicant has seen some
amazing changes in his life.  His relationships with people at work, family, church and
God are the best they have ever been.  Applicant has currently not viewed  pornography
for 111 days, as of the hearing.  Applicant has learned that his addiction to internet
pornography led him to disobey company policy and procedure.  He is deeply
 
4
embarrassed by the conduct.  He also contends that although he spent company time
wrongfully viewing pornography, he made up the time after hours by working late.  He
indicates that the logs of his time that were presented by company #1 to show that he
abused company time, were only logs that included his time spent in the main facility.
The Applicant contends that he had also been working on an off-site facility, but there
were no time logs kept of that time spent at work.  
The Applicant’s pastor, who has counseled the Applicant for his addiction,
testified that the Applicant, who is very active in the church, is extremely honest, faithful
in fulfilling his responsibilities and trustworthy.  He has also observed that the Applicant
has progressively improved and changed since counseling with the social worker.  (Tr.
pp. 75 -77).  
A number of company e-mail correspondence to and/or from the Applicant
attests to his security consciousness.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).  
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s current Program Manager, a
friend and professional associate involved in the church, his daughter and his wife attest
to his character traits of trustworthiness, dedication and commitment at work and to his
family and friends.  He is considered responsible and a man of integrity.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit B).   
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent guidelines.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
 
5
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of:
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or
resources.  
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
(Guideline M - Use of Information Technology Systems).  
39. The Concern.  Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness or ability
to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.  Information
Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software, manipulation,
storage, or protection of information. 
Conditions that could raise a security concerns:
40(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or
component thereof;
40(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system;
40(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, that
results in damage to the national security.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:  
None.
 
6
Guideline D - Sexual Behavior
12.   The Concern.  Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  No adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be
raise solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
13(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that
the person is unable to stop to that may be symptomatic of a personality disorder; 
13(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
 
7
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . .  shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
Guideline M (Information Technology) and Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) that
establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While a
rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct and
his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of
proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.  The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence in light of the appropriate legal standards and
factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the record, this
Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its case as to all
allegations in the SOR, and that Applicant's pattern of inappropriate sexual behavior
and personal conduct has a direct and negative impact on his suitability for access to
classified information.  
The Applicant admits that his addiction to internet pornography has caused him
serious problems at work.  He has viewed pornographic web sites on company
computers, downloaded non-business related internet web sites, and was ultimately
forced to resign instead of being fired for this misconduct.  He knew at the time that he
engaged in the conduct that he was violating company policies.  Furthermore, he was
 
8
not candid with prospective employers regarding the reason for his job resignation.
Considering the evidence in totality, this demonstrates a pattern of inappropriate
personal conduct, misuse of information technology and sexual behavior, which
presents high risk conduct that could subject the Applicant to pressure, coercion and/or
blackmail, which in turn could subject the Government to a security risk.  
Applicant’s high risk behavior places him in a vulnerable position to be
susceptible to pressure, coercion and/or blackmail.  He has just recently come to grips
with his addiction.  His addiction is a pattern of compulsive sexual behavior that he
cannot stop.  He is receiving counseling to combat his urges to access pornographic
sites.  At the present time, however, the risk is great that the Applicant may fall prey to
exploitation, coercion or duress.  Applicant’s pattern of high risk behavior places the
national interest at significant risk.  
Under Guideline E, Disqualifying Conditions 16(a) deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, and 16(d) credible
adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not
be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to consideration of: . . .
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations, and (4) evidence of significant misuse of
Government or other employer’s time or resources apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that
his personal conduct does not raise a security concern, and Guideline E is found
against the Applicant. 
Under Guideline M, Disqualifying Conditions 40(a) illegal or unauthorized entry
into any information technology system or component thereof, 40(e) unauthorized use
of a government or other information technology system, and 40(h) any misuse of
information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, that results in damage to the
national security apply.  None of the mitigation conditions are applicable.  The Applicant
has not met his burden of demonstrating that his misuse of information technology does
not raise a security concern, and Guideline M is found against the Applicant.
Under Guideline D, Disqualifying Conditions 13(b), a pattern of compulsive, self-
destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person is unable to stop or that may be
symptomatic of a personality disorder and, 13(c), sexual behavior that causes an
individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are even remotely applicable.  The Applicant has not met his
burden of demonstrating that his sexual behavior does not raise a security concern, and
Guideline D is found against the Applicant.
9
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
  
Considering all of the evidence presented, it does not come close to mitigating
the negative effects of his poor personal conduct, misuse of information technology and
sexual behavior, and the impact that they can have on his ability to properly safeguard
classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the SOR.    
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
         Paragraph 1:  Against the Applicant.
 Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant
                 Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 2:  Against the Applicant
 Subparagraph 2.a.:  Against the Applicant
    Paragraph 3:  Against the Applicant.
 Subparagraph 3.a.:   Against the Applicant
            Subparagraph 3.b.:  Against the Applicant
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance
for the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
