1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-04624
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA, Item 4), on
February 27, 2007, and he was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) on July 9, 2007. On August 13, 2008, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
security concerns under financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued on or after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on December 12, 2008. He
requested a decision be made on the record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support
of the allegations of the SOR) was sent to Applicant on March 3, 2009. Applicant
received the FORM on March 19, 2009. His response was received by DOHA on April
5, 2009. The case file was assigned to me on May 29, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains 10 allegations under the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.a., 1.b., 1.g., and 1.j. He denied subparagraphs
1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.h., and 1.i. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the
following factual findings. 
Applicant is 62 years old, divorced, with three grown children. He received a
Bachelors Degree in Public Safety in December 1979. He has been employed as a
security guard by a defense contractor since 2006. His previous jobs between 2001 and
2006 were in gun sales or security. From 1972 to 2001, Applicant was a police officer. 
Reasons for Applicant’s financial problems, included in his response to the
FORM, but missing from his answer to the SOR, were mistakes made during his
marriage. He stated:
The financial pitfalls I have encountered during the course of my marriage,
the most severe of which was the loss of my house due to delinquent
mortgage payments, funds for which, as well as other household
expenses, I had regularly provided to my ex-wife. My eventual divorce was
based on the sole premise “mismanagement of marital assets” by my wife
(response to FORM). 
In an interview with an OPM investigator in July 2007, Applicant stated that the
majority of his debt arose from medical bills associated with his hair transplant surgery,
and his daughter’s student loan (Item 12). 
The delinquent accounts shall be addressed in the order they appear in the SOR.
3 SOR 1.a. Applicant filed a Chapter 13 petition in April 2005 to keep his house,
a common reason for protecting real estate. The petition was dismissed in May 2005
before confirmation. Applicant contends a title company fraudulently convinced him to
file this petition. He lost his house and filed a complaint with the state banking
commission. No additional information was provided to substantiate his fraud claim. I
find against Applicant. 
3 SOR 1.b. Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in October 2005. He
listed approximately $19,700 in assets and $47,368 in liabilities. He was discharged
from all dischargeable debts, except for the student loan, in February 2006. I find
3
against Applicant based on the record that shows a dismissed Chapter 13 petition, then
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, with continuing financial difficulties. 
3 SOR 1.c. $4,685, credit card. The debt became a judgment in October 2002. It
was discharged in Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2006 (SOR 1.b.). This
account is found in Applicant’s favor. 
3 SOR 1.d. $1,917, telephone debt that was placed for collection in 2002.
Applicant’s credit report dated March 23, 2009, reflects that the account was included in
his Chapter 7 petition (SOR 1.b.). This subparagraph is found for Applicant. 
3 SOR 1.e. $944, medical services. Two government credit reports list this
account. Applicant denies this account because he filed all claims with one provider. As
Applicant indicated in his response to the FORM, the medical account does not appear
in his March 2009, credit report. There is a collection account in Applicant’s March 2009
credit report that has similar information to the credit reports in Items 10 and 11 (SOR
1.e.), but the information in the reports is insufficient to find this account is the same.
Also, the information in his credit report that reflects similarities to the medical account
alleged is reported as included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. This account is found in
Applicant’s favor. 
3 SOR 1.f. $63, telephone. Applicant was notified by the collection agency on
March 27, 2009, his account was paid in full (response to FORM). This account is
resolved for Applicant.
3 SOR 1.g. $51,586, student loan of Applicant’s daughter. From May 2005 to at
least July 2007 (July 2007 interview, Item 12), Applicant was living with his daughter.
According to his response to the FORM, his claim is that he assumed incorrectly the
loan was discharged in his Chapter 7 bankruptcy. On February 11, 2009, Applicant was
informed by letter from the student assistance organization that his $290 payment would
be deposited on February 20, 2009. Applicant provided his checking account ledger
showing that on February 20, 2009, his account was debited in the amount of $290.
There is no documentation to substantiate the loan was renegotiated or more than one
monthly payment was made, as Applicant contends. I find against Applicant under SOR
1.g.
3 SOR 1.h., $1,615, state tax lien. On March 25, 2009, Applicant paid $1,932 in
full satisfaction of the lien. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
3 SOR 1.i., $3,606, utility. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this
account, but did not provide an explanation as to why he denied the account. In his
response to the FORM, he indicated he called the utility and was given an account
number that is not the same as in the correspondence provided in the government
credit reports or in his March 2009, credit report. While the account numbers for the
account are not the same, there are striking similarities: (1) all three credit reports label
the account ‘Public Service;’ (2) and, all three reports quote the same figure of $3,606.
4
Applicant claims he called the collection agency identified by the original creditor.
Applicant did not explain why he did not call the collection agency referenced in the
SOR. See Item 10. This account is found against Applicant.
3 SOR 1.j. $174, debt to Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney in October 2005.
Applicant paid the debt by check on December 9, 2008 (response to FORM). The
account is found in Applicant’s favor.
Character Evidence
In his response to the FORM, Applicant identified measures taken to regain good
credit. He has no credit card debt. He will be paying off his car loan in May 2009. His
daughter’s student loan was renegotiated, and is being paid as agreed. He has a
savings and a checking account with more than $5000 in each. Applicant indicated that
he has worked diligently to improve his finances over the last several years. 
Applicant also included a number of copies of checks to show he has been at his
current address for almost two years. The checks, i.e., the check for March 1, 2009,
provide a post office box number, and a city, but not an address. According to the
February 11, 2009, letter from the student loan association (SOR 1.g.) to Applicant, his
post office box and the city are different. Though the checks are labeled for rent, and
include a month and year the rent applies to, there is no indication the checks have
been processed. Significantly, a third address, different from the other addresses, and
with no post office box, appears on the March 27, 2009, collection agency letter (SOR
1.f.) to Applicant (response to the FORM). 
Applicant presented no character evidence about his job performance and/or
standing in the community. He provided no evidence of financial counseling. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to the potential rather than actual risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
¶18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
The government has established their case under the financial considerations
(FC) guideline. When the SOR was published in August 2008, the government’s
documentation showed that Applicant had more than $59,000 in debt he was unable to
repay. FC disqualifying condition (DC) ¶19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
applies. 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 petition in April 2005 that was dismissed in May
2005. While filing a Chapter 13 petition is a legitimate procedure to protect real property,
Applicant provided no evidence in explanation of how he was defrauded by the title
6
company into filing the petition. Applicant then filed a Chapter 7 petition in October
2005, and had more than $47,300 in debt discharged in February 2006. Though he
blamed his former wife as the reason for his Chapter 7 filing, he told the investigator in
July 2007 that his medical bills for surgery and his daughter’s student loan constituted
the majority of his debt. Applicant has had continuing financial delinquencies as
demonstrated by SOR 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., and 1.j. FC DC ¶19.c. (a history not meeting
financial obligations) also applies. 
Applicant indicated he has worked hard to put his finances back in order. He
states he has no credit card debt and his car will be paid off in May 2009. This favorable
evidence must be weighed against the passage of 2 ½ years since February 2006
(Applicant’s Chapter 7 discharge)  showing no action taken to resolve his debt. Even
after his interview in July 2007, when he was placed on notice by the government that
his debts continued to be a concern, Applicant took no action until December 2008,
when he paid his bankruptcy attorney’s debt (SOR 1.j.), when he made a $290 payment
on the student loan (SOR 1.g.) in February 2009, and, when he paid the state tax lien
(SOR 1.h.) and the telephone account (SOR 1.f.) in March 2009. The fact that these
debts were paid after Applicant received the SOR in August or September 2008,
combined with the lack of independent character evidence, reduces the limited
mitigation he receives under FC mitigating condition (MC) ¶20.a. (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
and good judgment).
The mitigation Applicant receives under FC MC ¶20.b. (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) because of his divorce in April 2005 is
substantially decreased by the 2 ½ year period (February 2006 to December 2008)
showing Applicant did nothing to address the listed debts. 
FC MC ¶20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
does not apply as Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. Even though
six of eight debts have been paid off, the remaining delinquent accounts under SOR
1.g. and 1.i., amounting to more than $53,000, preclude a finding that Applicant has his
financial problems under control. 
The weight afforded to Applicant under FC MC ¶20.d. (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) is reduced by
the fact Applicant did not begin to repay the listed creditors until December 2008, about
three months after he received the SOR. Applicant’s unexplained Chapter 13 petition,
his Chapter 7 discharge of more than $47,300 in delinquent debt in 2006, followed by
continuing financial problems, and the absence of character evidence and financial
counseling, has not been mitigated by the FC mitigating conditions. 
7
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
I have examined the evidence with the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding against Applicant under the FC guideline. The case still must be
weighed within the context of nine variables known as the whole person concept. In
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following factors: 
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant was about 57 years old in 2005 when he filed the Chapter 13 petition
and the Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge petition. He claims he incorrectly assumed the
student loan would be discharged in his Chapter 7 petition. I am unable to accept his
claim. Even though Applicant may not have known in October 2005 that student loans
could not be discharged in bankruptcy, he was living with his daughter when he filed the
Chapter 7 petition. He was still living with her at the time of his government interview in
July 2007. It seems reasonable that either Applicant or his daughter would have been
notified that the student loan was not discharged. The only reason Applicant may not
have been notified was because the bankruptcy court did not have the correct address.
Based on the multiple addresses Applicant presented to his creditors during the security
investigation, it is entirely likely the court did not have the correct address. His claim he
was not notified is substantially discredited by the different addresses he provided
during the course of the security investigation and this adjudication. Even after being
placed on notice in July 2007 that his delinquent debts were a governmental concern,
Applicant did not take action until December 2008, after he received the SOR.
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s evidence in mitigation is insufficient to
carry his ultimate burden of persuasion under the FC guideline.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
