 
 1
                                                
 
 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-07808 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline 
for alcohol consumption. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), which he signed on July 10, 2007. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 2
                                                
On December 31, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer to the SOR on January 12, 
2009, in which he admitted to all allegations in the Statement of Reasons. He also 
requested a decision without a hearing. In accordance with ¶E3.1.8 of the Directive, the 
government requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on March 17, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on 
March 19, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 24, 2009 and I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on April 21, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, the Department Counsel offered five exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted. Applicant testified and did 
not present witnesses. He offered three exhibits, Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. He timely submitted one additional document, which was admitted 
without objection as AE D. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 28, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations, as well as those in response to the 
DOHA interrogatories (GE 3), are admitted as fact. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 27 years old, received a bachelor’s degree in Business Management in 
2005. He plans to begin a master’s program within two months after the hearing. He is 
unmarried and has no children. Applicant became employed by a defense contractor in 
May 2005, where he currently works as a Program Analyst-Junior. He received a 
security clearance in November 2005 (GE 1; 5; Tr. 19). 
 
Applicant first drank alcohol during high school, at about 15 years old, because of 
peer pressure. He first became intoxicated at 16. He consumed alcohol every few 
months, and was intoxicated approximately two times during high school. He drank more 
frequently, about twice per month, after starting college in 2002 (Tr. 29- 34). In August 
2002, he was charged with Possession of Alcohol by a Person under 21. He pled guilty, 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the 
Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was 
issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
was placed on unsupervised probation for one year3 and performed community service 
(GE 4; Tr. 38-40).  
 
In August 2006, Applicant attended a concert with friends, and became 
intoxicated. He was stopped at a sobriety checkpoint after leaving the concert. He failed 
the field sobriety test and was arrested and charged with Driving While Intoxicated in 
State A. In October 2006, he pled guilty and served 2 days in jail, with the remainder of 
the 30-day sentence suspended. His State A driving privileges were suspended for one 
year. He also was ordered to attend alcohol awareness classes, and attended a six-
week program from approximately November 2006 to February 2007. The classes 
consisted of videos and group discussions (GE 2, 3; Tr. 41-44). 
 
In May 2007, in State B, Applicant had been drinking alcohol, and while driving 
afterward, he reached for a cell phone, and hit a parked car, which then hit the car 
parked in front of it (GE 2). He pulled over and notified residents of a nearby house, who 
contacted the police. He was charged with negligent driving, driving while under the 
influence of alcohol, driving while under the influence-per se, and driving while impaired 
by alcohol. He reported his alcohol-related arrests to his security officer. Three of the 
charges were not prosecuted, and Applicant pleaded guilty to Driving a Vehicle while 
Under the Influence of Alcohol. He was sentenced to 90 days incarceration, with 81 days 
suspended. Applicant spent six days in jail, with two days credited for good behavior. He 
was also sentenced to three years unsupervised probation, which ends in 2010. The 
unsupervised probation does not include a prohibition against consuming alcohol. 
Applicant’s sentence included a 90 day-restriction on his driving license, but because he 
needed to be able to drive to his job, he chose to install a vehicle interlock system on his 
car for one year. The system prevents starting the car until the driver blows into a device 
that checks the driver’s alcohol level. A reading of more than 0.01 prevents operating the 
car. The device also requires a periodic re-check while driving. Applicant completed the 
one-year period of vehicle interlock monitoring in about August 2008. (GE 2; 4; 5; Tr. 44-
50). 
 
Before the final disposition of the 2007 case, and before consulting with an 
attorney, Applicant decided to enroll in alcohol treatment (Tr. 46-47). His decision 
resulted from discussions with his parents, who informed him that his maternal 
grandfather had died because of his excessive alcohol consumption. Applicant does not 
want the same thing to happen to him (GE 2). He also recognized that he needed help:  
 
At that time I didn’t think I had an alcohol problem before the second DUI, 
and for me to get behind the wheel a second time, I needed some kind of 
mentoring or help to help me not do that ever again. (Tr. 47). 
 
He participated in a 26-week treatment program that included random urinalyses, 
breathalyzer testing, alcohol and chemical dependency screening, and group sessions, 
but did not involve aftercare requirements. He also arrived 30 minutes before group 
3
                                                 
3 Applicant testified that he thought this probation ended when he reached 21 years old, which would 
have been in February 2003, 6 months after the incident (Tr. 39). 
 
 
sessions so that he could engage in individual counseling (Tr. 61). He was diagnosed 
with alcohol abuse. Applicant attended from July 2007 to January 2008 (AE A; D).  
 
Since Applicant's second DUI, Applicant consumed alcohol twice: he had 
approximately four beers in July 2007, before he attended counseling. He also had two 
glasses of wine at his brother’s wedding in May 2008 (Tr. 33-35). He has never 
experienced blackouts, hallucinations or other withdrawal symptoms (Tr. 65). He admits 
that excessive alcohol affects his judgment, and his intent is to avoid driving at any time 
he has had alcohol, and to abstain from alcohol except for such important occasions. He 
talks with his friends about avoiding drinking and driving, sharing what he has 
experienced, the problems that resulted, and the thousands of dollars it has cost him in 
legal fees, court costs, and loss of work time. He volunteers to pick up his friends when 
they drink so they do not have to drive. His girlfriend does not drink alcohol. Applicant 
testified that when he drank, he was not involved in outside activities, but he now 
volunteers as a coach, working at least five days per week with a church softball team 
and a winter softball team (GE 2; Tr. 21; 50-51; 57-59; 63). 
 
Applicant's performance review of January to December 2008 indicates that he is 
a hard worker who has grown in his position, taken on new responsibilities, and 
successfully managed contracts. His supervisor of more than three years noted that 
Applicant is dependable and, during the time she has supervised him, he has become a 
team leader who is a significant company asset (AE B; C).  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
the cited guideline.   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
4
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to 
deny or revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must 
be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its 
burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6  
 
 A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as 
his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the government.7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern about alcohol consumption is that “excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21). 
 
AG ¶ 22 includes the following relevant conditions that can raise security 
concerns and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program; 
 
5
                                                 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 Applicant was charged with possessing alcohol when he was under-age, and 
with DUI in 2006 and 2007. These incidents support application of AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 
22(c). Moreover, AG ¶ 22(e) applies in part, because he was evaluated as an alcohol 
abuser. However, the evaluation was provided by a professional who is not a clinical 
social worker, but holds a master’s degree in clinical alcohol and drug counseling.   
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that can mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant had two DUI convictions within a short period of time. They occurred in 
2006 and 2007, between two and almost three years ago. The second DUI brought 
Applicant to the realization that he must change his behavior, and his subsequent 
actions in attending a four-month program on his own initiative, along with his modified 
alcohol consumption over the past two years, reflect favorably on his good judgment. 
AG ¶ 23(a) applies.    
 
After his second DUI in a short period of time, Applicant has acknowledged that 
he had a problem with alcohol consumption. He reported his arrests to his security 
officer. He discussed the issue with his parents, and learned of a disturbing family 
history related to alcohol. Applicant entered a 26-week treatment program before the 
court required him to do so, and before an attorney advised him to do so. He has 
established a responsible pattern of alcohol consumption by drinking only twice in the 
past two years. AG ¶ 23(b) applies.  
 
Applicant successfully completed the counseling program he voluntarily entered, 
and his two uses of alcohol in two years represent responsible modified consumption 
6
 
 
consistent with a diagnosis of alcohol abuse. Applicant has also received a favorable 
report, though not a prognosis. In addition, he cannot receive complete mitigation 
because the counselor who evaluated him is not a licensed clinical social worker. 
Applicant’s actions also earn partial mitigation under AG ¶ 23(d). I find for Applicant on 
Guideline G. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant made serious missteps by increasing his alcohol consumption after 
college. His choices led to two DUIs in a short period of time. Fortunately, several 
events brought him to realize the gravity of his situation: the second DUI, learning of his 
grandfather’s alcohol use and death, as well as his parents’ advice. On his own 
initiative, Applicant sought and participated in a 26-week treatment program. Although 
he was diagnosed as an alcohol abuser, and is not required to be abstinent, he has 
consumed alcohol only twice in the past two years, showing serious commitment to 
avoiding the mistakes of the past. His honesty with his security officer demonstrates 
trustworthiness. Applicant’s conduct in the future is unlikely to raise alcohol-related 
security concerns.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
 
7
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.d.  For Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
