 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08336 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 27, 2008. On March 
17, 2009, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 20, 2009; answered it on April 1, 2009; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
April 9, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 24, 2009, and the 
 
2 
 
 
case was assigned to me on April 27, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 
28, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 13, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until May 29, 2009, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX G, which 
was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript on May 28, 
2009. The record closed on May 29, 2009.  
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 On my own motion and without objection by either party, I amended the SOR to 
reflect Applicant’s correct social security number (Tr. 4). The amendment is handwritten 
on the SOR. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
 Applicant repeatedly objected to questions from Department Counsel about his 
marital status, the type of auto he drives, his student loans, and his failure to file income 
tax returns, arguing that information sought was irrelevant (Tr. 50, 54, 71, 73). I 
overruled his objections on the ground that the information was relevant to the whole 
person analysis.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old production planner for a federal contractor. He earned 
a bachelor of science degree in June 1996, a master’s degree in business 
administration in September 2000, and a bachelor of science in information technology 
in October 2001 (Tr. 53-54). He has worked for his current employer since May 2008. 
He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in December 2000 and divorced in May 2005. He has an 
eight-year-old son, for whom he pays child support (Tr. 49). He remarried in October 
2005 and separated from his second wife in March 2006.  
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) dated February 18, 2009; August 6, 
2008; March 24, 2009; and May 12, 2009, reflect two credit card accounts with balances 
of about $5,900 and $3,100, both charged off as bad debts. They also reflect a 
delinquent cell phone bill for $86. The August 2008 CBR and the March 2009 CBR 
reflect a delinquent auto loan with a balance of $14,457 that was charged off as a bad 
debt. The CBR dated May 23, 2009, however, reflects a past due balance of only $371 
on the auto loan (GX 2; GX 3; AX A through E).  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he assumed the auto 
loan was resolved when the auto was repossessed and sold in 2003, because the 
 
3 
 
 
creditor has not contacted him about the debt (GX 5 at 2). He has taken no action to 
dispute or resolve the debt.  
 
Applicant also stated he informed the credit card companies that he had been 
laid off, and he assumed the debts were written off because he has not been contacted 
by the creditors (GX 5 at 2). His security clearance application reflects that he was 
unemployed from June to November 2001, February to August 2003, September to 
November 2004, and in July 2006 (GX 1 at 3-4). He testified his actual period of 
unemployment in 2006 was from June to August (Tr. 40). He has taken no action to 
dispute or resolve the credit card debts. 
 
The $89 cell phone debt arose when Applicant moved. He was advised by the 
telephone company that the balance due on his account would be transferred to his new 
account, but the transfer never occurred (Tr. 31). After the hearing, he presented 
documentary evidence reflecting that the bill was paid in full (AX G). He continues to 
have cell phone service with the same company (Tr. 62). 
 
Applicant testified the delinquent credit card debts were accumulated during his 
first marriage, when both he and his wife were laid off from their jobs. They used the 
credit cards for basic living expenses.  
 
After Applicant’s first wife left him, he was responsible for all the accumulated 
debts. The debts were solely in Applicant’s name because of his wife’s poor credit rating 
(Tr. 83-84). In May 2005, he was ordered to pay child support retroactively for the 
previous two years (AX F; Tr. 48). His monthly child support payments are $871 (GX 5 
at 8), and they are automatically deducted from his pay checks (Tr. 49). 
 
 All the debts alleged in the SOR are at least six years old. Applicant is not 
delinquent on any of his current obligations, including his child support (AX F). He 
submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) dated November 6, 2008. It reflected net 
monthly income of $2,688, expenses of $2,600.50, debt payments of $553, and a net 
monthly remainder of $87.50. It reflected no savings or investments (GX 5 at 6). He 
testified his current gross income is about $43,000 per year (Tr. 47). 
 
 Applicant has not filed his federal and state income tax returns for the past three 
years. He estimates he will owe a total of about $1,600, plus penalties and interest (Tr. 
79-80, 84). He owes about $183,000 in student loans, which are in a deferred status 
(Tr. 55-56). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling about $23,532. The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised where there is an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-
pronged condition that is raised where there is “indebtedness caused by frivolous or 
irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay 
the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is 
“consistent spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive 
indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other 
financial analysis.” AG ¶ 19(g) is raised by “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.”  
 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised 
because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.” AG ¶ 19(e) is 
raised because the evidence reflects that the credit card debts and auto loan 
delinquency arose during the 2001-2003 time frame, when Applicant’s expenses 
exceeded his income. 
 
 Since AG ¶ 19(g) was not alleged in the SOR, Applicant’s admitted failure to file 
his tax returns for three years may not be considered as an independent basis for 
denying his application for a clearance. His tax delinquencies may be considered, 
however, for the limited purposes of assessing his credibility; deciding whether a 
particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; evaluating evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; considering whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole person analysis.@ ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
 
6 
 
 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). All of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts were incurred at least six years ago, but three of the four debts alleged 
remain unresolved. Applicant’s continued employment is subject to the vagaries of the 
economy, making future periods of unemployment possible, and he has no savings to 
protect him from further financial difficulty if he is laid off. His failure to take any action to 
resolve the credit card debts and the auto loan delinquency casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant has suffered two 
marital breakups, several periods of unemployment, and consistent underemployment, 
all of which were largely beyond his control. However, his failure to take any action to 
resolve his delinquent debts after returning to the workforce precludes application of this 
mitigating condition.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Merely waiting for a debt to drop off a credit 
report by the passage of time is not a factor in an applicant’s favor. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001). Applicant produced evidence that the 
cell phone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was resolved, but he produced no evidence of 
actions to resolve the remaining debts. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established for SOR ¶ 
1.c, but not for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but not for the 
remaining debts. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He was sincere and articulate at the 
hearing. He is significantly underemployed for a person of his educational level and 
experience. He has been able to keep up with current debts, but he is facing delinquent 
tax payments as well as significant educational debt after the deferral period ends. His 
PFS reflects that he is living paycheck to paycheck, with no reserve funds for 
emergencies or temporary periods of unemployment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
