 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06746 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
On February 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 13, 2009. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on June 15, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled 
on July 8, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called three witnesses, 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received over the Government’s 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 16, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has an 
associate’s degree and requires about another year of college in order to obtain a 
bachelor’s degree. He is single with no children.1  
 
 Applicant has a medical history of treatment for anxiety and panic attacks dating 
back to about 2001, when he was in college. His family physician prescribed medication 
for his condition in about 2001. He was never treated by a psychiatrist or psychologist. 
The medication controlled his symptoms. He took the medication for about a year and 
then weaned himself off the medication.2  
 
 Applicant enlisted in the United States Air Force in 2003, to go on active duty in 
May 2004. He had been off medication and was symptom-free for more than a year at 
that point. He told his recruiter about his medical history. The recruiter told him not to 
mention his medical history or he would not be permitted to enlist. He accepted the 
recruiter’s illegal advice and did not list or disclose his medical history on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), at the Military Entrance 
Processing Station (MEPS), or during processing at basic training.3  
 
 Applicant’s symptoms returned during basic training. He sought medical attention 
and reported his medical history. He was processed and separated from the Air Force 
after less than a month at basic training. He received an Entry Level Separation with 
Uncharacterized service on the basis of Fraudulent Entry into Military Service.4 
 
 Applicant resumed treatment by his physician in 2005, and he went back on 
medication. His doctor reported in 2008 that: 
 
[Applicant] has occasional problems with rapid heart rate and panic 
attacks. He is currently taking Lexapro, an antidepressant. He uses Xanax 
sparingly for panic attacks. Medical problems are well controlled. He 
should continue to take his current medications. They are not likely to 
affect his job performance.5  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-29; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18, 24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 17-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4, 5. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant obtained his current job in 2005. He informed his company about his 
medical and military history before he was hired. His company’s chief executive officer 
(CEO) and facility security officer (FSO) testified on his behalf. He also submitted 
several character letters. He is described as a man of integrity, who is honest, 
forthcoming, intelligent, dedicated, reliable, hardworking, dependable, responsible, and 
trustworthy. His witnesses are aware of his background and recommend him for a 
security clearance.6  
 
 Applicant fully disclosed his medical and military history when he submitted his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions in February 2008. He is aware that it was 
wrong to be untruthful about his medical history in order to enlist in the Air Force, even if 
he was following the advice of his recruiter. He has learned from his mistakes and 
matured. He is now completely aware of the importance of being totally honest.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 30-41; AE A, B. 
 
7 Tr. at 17-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other credible government representative; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant intentionally did not disclose his medical history on his SF 86, at the 
MEPS, or during processing at basic training. He was discharged from the Air Force for 
Fraudulent Entry into Military Service. All of the above disqualifying conditions have 
been established.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant did not make a good-faith effort to correct the concealment of his 
medical condition before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a) is not applicable. 
His actions were based in part upon the illegal advice of his recruiter. However, 
Applicant knew it was wrong and he did not correct the concealment at MEPS or at 
basic training. AG ¶ 17(b) is not applicable. Since his discharge more than five years 
ago, Applicant has been completely truthful about his medical and military history. He 
informed his employer of his background before he was hired. He now realizes the 
importance of absolute honesty. I find that such conduct is unlikely to recur and it does 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His 
disclosure of his background has eliminated any vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are all applicable.  
 
6 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant concealed his medical 
background on multiple occasions in order to enlist in the Air Force. He knew he was 
wrong to follow the illegal advice of his recruiter. Since his discharge more than five 
years ago, he has been open and honest about his medical and military history. He fully 
informed his employer of his background before he was hired. Applicant is highly 
regarded at his company, inspiring the CEO and FSO to testify on his behalf. He is 
remorseful for his actions and never intends to repeat that type of dishonest behavior.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
