1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08445
SSN: ---------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Clearance is denied.
On October 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On November 13, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, denying all of the
allegations except SOR subparagraphs 1.s and 1.t, and requested an administrative
determination. On February 13, 2009, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
Materials (FORM), and DOHA mailed it to Applicant. She received it on February 18,
ISCR Case No. 03-07826 (App. Bd. June 17, 2005 at 3).1
2
2009, along with instructions to file any objections or supplementary information within
30 days. Applicant did not respond, and the case was assigned to me on May 15, 2009.
Procedural Ruling
SOR subparagraphs 1.g and 1.k fail to identify specific creditors to whom
Applicant allegedly is indebted. Although an SOR does not have to satisfy the strict
requirements of a criminal indictment, it must still place an applicant on adequate notice
of the allegations so that she may have a reasonable opportunity to respond and
prepare a defense.  Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.k. do not meet this minimum threshold;1
therefore, I conclude that they are not justiciable.
Evidentiary Rulings
1. The government must produce evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR
that have been controverted (Directive ¶ E3.1.14). Here, the only evidence the
government provided to support SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c through 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m,
1.n, 1.p, and 1.hh are credit reports noting that the status of these debts was in dispute
(see generally, Items 5 and 6). These documents fail to satisfy the government’s burden
of production. Consequently, I have resolved the aforementioned subparagraphs in
Applicant’s favor, and will not consider them further in the Decision.
2. SOR subparagraph 1.q alleges a delinquent account for $519. The credit
bureau report the government provides lists this debt multiple times. Some of the
listings note that Applicant has satisfied it (Compare Item 5 at 3 with Item 6 at 19). The
government has not satisfied its initial burden of production. I have resolved SOR
subparagraph 1.q in Applicant’s favor.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old, married woman with five children ranging in age from
16 to 27. A previous marriage ended in divorce in 2002. She has been married to her
current husband since 2008 (Item 4 at 15). Her educational background is unknown
from the record. Since at least 2000, she has worked as a professional driver (Item 4 at
5).
As of April 2008, Applicant was indebted to 20 creditors on delinquent accounts
totalling approximately $9,600 (Items 5 and 6). By May 2008, Applicant had satisfied
SOR subparagraphs 1.s, an automobile loan for approximate $1,000, and 1.t, a $132
medical bill (Item 2 at 5-7). She contends that she has either contacted, or has
attempted to contact all of the other creditors, and that her ex-husband accrued many of
the debts. As for the debts that are her responsibility, Applicant contends she is
negotiating payment plans. She provided no documentary evidence supporting these
contentions. 
3
In Applicant’s Answer, she alluded to some medical problems (Item 2 at 1). She
did not elaborate upon whether these problems contributed to the accrual of her
delinquencies.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
The government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR (Directive ¶ E3.1.14, as discussed in the Evidentiary Rulings Section, supra).
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant satisfied SOR subparagraphs 1.s and 1.t. I conclude they no
longer represent a security concern. The remaining delinquencies, (SOR
subparagraphs 1.b, 1.h, 1.l, 1.o, 1.p, 1.r, 1.u through 1.gg, and 1.ii) however, trigger the
application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
4
Applicant deserves credit for satisfying the two debts she admitted. Her efforts to
satisfy or resolve the others, however, appear to have been limited to phone calls. She
offered no evidence to support her contention that her ex-husband accrued some of the
debts, nor did she offer any evidence to support her contention that she was arranging
payment plans for the other SOR debts. Absent any documentation regarding these
remaining delinquencies, I conclude that none of the mitigating conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.”
Absent sufficient proof that Applicant has rehabilitated her finances, the likelihood
that her financial problems will continue is unacceptably high. Upon considering this
case in the context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant’s troubled
finances continue to render her a security risk, as she has not shown any significant
improvement in her debt problems.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.i - 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.m -1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.p - 1.q: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.s - 1.t: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.u - 1.gg: Against Applicant
5
Subparagraph 1.hh: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.ii: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
