1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )            ISCR Case No. 08-09796
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
form (e-QIP) on May 30, 2008. On December 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security
concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
In a response notarized on December 29, 2008, Applicant admitted the eight
allegations set forth in the SOR and declined a hearing on the record. Department
Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Materials (FORM), dated February 19, 2009, that
included 12 attached items. Applicant received the FORM on February 25, 2009. He did
not respond to the FORM within the 30 days provided. On July 7, 2009, the Director,
 Item 2, Response to SOR at 3.      1
 Id.      2
 Id.      3
 Id.      4
2
DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge for administrative
determination. I was assigned the case on July 9, 2009. Based upon a review of the
case file, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding
the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old systems administrator working for a defense
contractor. He has worked for the same company for more than seven years. Prior to
that, he served in the military for approximately 30 years. Applicant has earned a high
school diploma and a bachelor of science degree in information technology. He has
been married for nearly 20 years. In responding to the SOR, Applicant submitted scant
facts with little elaboration and no supporting evidence. 
At some unspecified point in time, Applicant’s wife developed a gambling
compulsion. Spending “thousands of dollars per month at the casino,” her gambling
compromised Applicant’s financial stability.  He told her he thought she had a problem1
and asked her to quit gambling, but she continued. He eventually had her name
removed from the family bank account. This “helped a little, but the damage was
already done and a snowballing affect [sic] occurred.”  He struggled to stay current on2
their mounting debt while he tried to pay her creditors. Consequently, many of his
obligations became delinquent and, ultimately, he lost his home to foreclosure in July
2008. 
Forced to vacate their home in the middle of 2008, Applicant expended
approximately $6,000 in expenses moving out of the home and about $3,000 moving
into a rental property. To finance this move and meet his obligations, Applicant
liquidated his 401(k) retirement account and obtained a $3,000 advance from his
employer. Around this same time, Applicant’s automobile “failed,” causing him to make
a $2,600 down payment on a replacement vehicle.  Next, his wife’s car lease expired.3
Due to their low credit rating, he was required to refinance her car at a high rate. 
By the end of August 2008, Applicant believed the worst was over and that his
finances were nearly stabilized. In September 2008, however, his employer began
collecting $1,000 per month to repay its $3,000 advance. This dramatic reduction in net
salary made it “literally impossible” for him to pay his bills.  4
Applicant states, without evidence, that he tried to negotiate settlements with
some of his creditors. Some of the creditors refused to negotiate or demanded
 Id.      5
 Id.      6
3
payments he could not afford. He also asserts that some of the negotiated payments
were set for automatic payment from Applicant’s bank account, but at a fee of $35 per
transaction plus $5 a day “for continuous negativity in the account.”  He claims such5
bank fees added an additional financial burden of over $600 a month. 
At issue are six delinquent debts amounting to approximately $147,400. This
includes approximately $134,000 owed toward his foreclosure and about $12,000 owed
on a car loan. Additionally, Applicant admits he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection
twice, in March 23, 1998, and in September 26, 1988. Both petitions were ultimately
discharged shortly after filing. In describing his present status in relation to his current
debts, Applicant writes: “I am not sure what to do at this point, but this is the reasons
[sic] for my indebtedness, except I am trying to continue negotiations with creditors.”   6
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these
guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common
sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” An administrative judge must
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The U. S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      7
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      9
 Id.      10
 Id.      11
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.      12
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a7
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  8 9
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the U.S. Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The U.S.
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The11
decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as
to the loyalty of an applicant.  Nor does it reflect badly on that person’s character. It is12
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.      13
 W hile FC DC AG ¶ 19(i) refers to gambling debts, it refers to debts incurred by an applicant.      14
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.13
The Directive sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline. 
Applicant admits to having successfully petitioned for bankruptcy in 1988 and in
1998. He also admits he is “not sure what to do” about the approximately $147,400 in
delinquent debt he presently owes. Such facts are sufficient to give rise to financial
considerations disqualifying condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts”) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).14
With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to overcome the case
against him and mitigate security concerns. 
There are insufficient facts to determine what led Applicant to file for bankruptcy
in both 1988 and 1998. He attributes his 2008 financial problems, however, to his wife’s
gambling and his efforts to pay her debts. As a consequence, his home was foreclosed
upon and other accounts were neglected. His automobile’s failure subsequently
required him to seek a replacement car. In response to these obstacles, he removed
his wife from their bank account, took a loan from his employer, liquidated his
retirement savings, and tried to negotiate with his creditors. To the extent these factors
contributed to his present situation, financial considerations mitigating condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances”) applies. 
The majority of debts at issue became delinquent within the last two years.
Applicant’s 2008 finances present him with a financial dilemma it may be presumed he
previously faced in 1988 and in 1999. While he links his current predicament with his
wife’s gambling and writes she is no longer on the family bank account, he presents no
evidence indicating her problem is under control or that she is otherwise precluded from
acquiring more family debt. Moreover, he has no plan to address his current financial
situation. FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) does not
apply. Further, there are no facts indicating he sought or received financial counseling
or that any significant progress has been made to pay off this debt, obviating
application of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (“the person has received or is receiving counseling
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or
is under control”) and FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”). No other FC MCs apply.
6
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant is a mature, educated man who rendered service to this country for
the majority of his life. In requesting an administrative determination, however, he chose
to present unelaborated facts and no supporting documentation. What documentation
there is indicates a repeated pattern of financial instability about every 10 years, in
1988, 1998, and 2008. Assuming his wife’s gambling was the cause of his current
situation, there is a basis for mitigating their acquisition of delinquent debt related to her
problem. There is, however, no evidence he has made any progress on the debts at
issue and no indication he has devised a viable plan to address this debt by means
other than repeated negotiations. Indeed, Applicant concedes he has no idea as to how
to proceed at this point. Consequently, the accounts at issue remain delinquent. In light
of the fact that the ultimate burden is on Applicant, financial considerations security
concerns remain unmitigated. Therefore, it is not clearly consistent with national
security to grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
__________________________
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
