 
 
 
 
1
                                                             
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR No. 08-07093 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
  HISTORY OF CASE 
 
On February 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 On February 23, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 15, 
2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing on May 11, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on June 11, 2009. Department counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. He 
did not offer any exhibits into evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on May 27, 2008.  
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department counsel requested administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Egypt. (Tr. 19) The request and the attached documents are included in the record as 
Administrative Hearing Exhibits (AHE) I through VII. Applicant did not object to 
consideration of those Exhibits. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters 
of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in Paragraphs 
1 through 3 of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in Egypt and attended grammar and high 
school there. In 1992, he earned a bachelor’s degree in English literature from an 
Egyptian university. In 1993, he met his wife, a U.S. citizen, in Italy. In early 1994, he 
came to the United States and married in May 1994. They have two teenage children, 
both born and residing in the United States. In June 1999, he became a U.S. citizen. In 
March 2003, he and his wife divorced. They subsequently engaged in a custody law 
suit. 
 
 After moving to the United States in 1994, Applicant worked for various private 
companies. From 1994 to March 2000, he was a machinist for his mother-in-law’s 
company; from March 2000 to October 2002, he was a sales and marketing manager. 
He then returned to Egypt for seven months to live. After coming back to the United 
States, he worked as a limousine driver from April 2003 to March 2004. (GE 1) 
Subsequently, he started his own company as a commercial driver. (Tr. 26, 33) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Egypt. They are both deceased. He is one of 
four children, all born in Egypt. He has three sisters who are citizens and residents of 
Egypt. All three are married. One sister is a housewife; one sister is a teacher in a 
Christian school; and one sister is an architect engineer for a private company. None of 
his sisters or their husbands are affiliated with the Egyptian government. (Tr. 37) He has 
 
 
 
 
3
unsuccessfully tried to help two sisters move to the United States. One of them has a 
five-year visa for the United States and had lived here for a period of time. The third 
sister has applied for a Canadian visa.  He acknowledged that he has an extended 
family and friends living in Egypt. (Tr. 38) He maintains contact with his family and 
friends in Egypt. 
 
  Applicant traveled to Egypt in July 1999, January 2001, November 2001, 
January 2002, July 2002, and March 2005.  In 1999, he and his family moved there in 
an effort to preserve his marriage, which had begun to deteriorate. His wife taught 
English at an American school while there. He and his wife subsequently left and 
returned to the United States. In 2001, he made trips to Egypt because his parents were 
ill. His mother died in November 2001. Between July 2002 and March 2003, he stayed 
in Egypt because his father was very sick. (Tr. 51) While living in Egypt, his wife filed for 
divorce in the United States. After learning that, he became romantically involved with a 
young woman, whom he married and then divorced after two weeks in order to avoid a 
scandal. (Tr. 52) 
 
 In 1999, Applicant shipped two cars from the United States to Egypt because he 
thought he and his wife were going to live there. In 2002, he shipped another car. At the 
time he shipped the cars, he had an Egyptian passport that allowed him to import the 
cars without paying custom taxes. Eventually, he sold the cars and deposited the 
proceeds into an Egyptian bank account. He believes he has about $17,500 in the 
account.  He has not transferred that money to a U.S. bank because he does not want 
his former wife to gain access to it. He wants it to remain available for emergencies. (Tr.  
61) He does not have any other assets in Egypt. (GE 5)       
 
 Applicant received his first U.S. passport in June 1999, after becoming a 
naturalized citizen. He also had an Egyptian passport until 2005 when he surrendered it 
to the company that is sponsoring him for a security clearance. It was then destroyed. 
He used both passports, depending on which one made travel easier for him. (GE 2 at 
9; GE 5).   
 
 After September 11, 2001, Applicant decided to help the United States in its war 
on terror. In 2004, he applied for an interpreter position with a federal contractor. In 
pursuit of that position, he completed four security clearance applications: one in March 
2004, one in April 2007, one in October 2007, and one in December 2008. 
 
 In response to Question 27, Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activities-Illegal 
Use of Drugs on the March 2004 application, Applicant denied that he illegally used 
drugs. (GE 4) In his three subsequent applications, he disclosed that he used marijuana 
once or twice daily from 2001 to February 2004. In his Answer, he admitted that he 
deliberately lied when he completed the March 2004 application because he wanted his 
“application to look good.” (Tr. 68) 
 
 In further explaining the falsification, Applicant asserted that he was a different 
person in March 2004 and that he has changed his life since then. At that time he was 
 
 
 
 
4
in debt, used marijuana, and did not have a career, family, or home. He was in “the 
middle of a tornado.” (Tr. 70) Today, he has a good relationship with his children, has 
paid several debts, and has a career as a professional driver. (Tr. 72-73) He stated that 
he stopped using marijuana in February 2004. (Tr. 71) He has been dating an American 
woman for several years with whom he lives.  
  
 Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose that he lived in Egypt from July 2002 
and March 2003 in response to Section 8. Where You Have Lived on the March 2004 
application. He said that it was “101 percent a naïve mistake.” (Tr. 63) At the time he 
completed the form, he was unaware of the importance of being completely accurate in 
his answers because he did not know the significance of a security clearance. (Tr. 65) 
He did not disclose the information in the April 2007 application. (GE 3) In the October 
2007 application, he disclosed that he lived in Egypt from January 2002 to April 2002. 
(GE 2) He did not disclose the information in the December 2008 application. (GE 1) 
Sometime during the investigation, he informed the Government that he traveled to 
Egypt between July 2002 and March 2003. (GE 5) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he owes two law firms a total of $15,000 for legal 
fees attributable to his divorce. In May and June of this year, he made $50 payments to 
each firm for a total of $200. (Tr. 74-77) He intends to continue making those monthly 
payments until the delinquent debts are paid. All of his other debts are paid. (Tr. 74) 
Currently, he earns approximately $50,000 annually through his business and hopes to 
earn $100,000 in the future. (Tr. 73, 81)   
 
 Applicant asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship. “I am very proud of being 
American.” (Tr. 82)  
  
Egypt 
 
Egypt is a populous republic with a developing economy. It has close relations 
with the United States and shares a mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability. It 
receives a substantial amount of U.S. foreign aid. Egypt’s human rights record is poor 
and serious abuses continue to occur. Despite aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Egypt remains high. Terrorists in Egypt target U.S. 
interests to exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups 
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.     
 
POLICIES 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the Government’s concern about foreign 
influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
 
 
 
6
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;”1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject 
the individual to heightened risk or foreign influence or exploitation. 
  
  Applicant maintains contact with his three sisters and their families who are 
resident citizens of Egypt. Although Egypt has a close relationship with the United 
States, it continues to have human rights issues and has been victimized by terrorist 
attacks. This fact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion, and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
(b) have been raised by the evidence. Applicant also maintains a bank account there, 
raising a concern under AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
  After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to the Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the 
resulting security concerns.  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 
are potentially applicable to the disqualifying conditions: 
 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant’s siblings do not work for the Egyptian government or other companies 
or institutions that would have interest in acquiring protected information. Only their 
physical presence in Egypt creates a potential that their well-being could be threatened 
to the point that Applicant would confront a choice between their interests and those of 
the United States. Based on Egypt’s relationship with the United States and his siblings’ 
professions, I find it unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the Egyptian government and those of the United 
States, if and when he obtains a position as an interpreter in another country. AG ¶ 8(a) 
has some application. 
 
Applicant produced some evidence establishing the limited application of AG ¶ 
8(b). He has strong connections and feelings for the United States where he and his 
children reside. He has been a naturalized citizen since 1999. He has an American 
girlfriend with whom he lives. He has worked in the United States since 1994 and now 
owns his own business. Those facts tend to indicate that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply because Applicant’s communication and relationships 
with his siblings are more than casual and not infrequent. Since leaving Egypt in 1994, 
he has returned to see his family in 1999, in 2002, and 2005. From July 2002 to March 
2003, he lived there. These visits, along with his attempts to obtain U.S. citizenship for 
two sisters and his ongoing communication with them, demonstrate his deep 
connections to his family.  
 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant intends to maintain his $17,500 Egyptian bank account because he 
does not want his former wife to have access to it and needs it for any emergencies. 
Given his reliance on that account, AG ¶ 8(f) cannot apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The Government’s security concern pertaining to personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
One Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition is particularly relevant and 
potentially disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 16(a) provides that the “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities” may raise a security 
concern. Applicant incorrectly answered two questions on the March 2004 security 
clearance application. He denied that he intentionally falsified his answer to one 
question and admitted that he deliberately lied in the other.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant falsified his March 2004 security clearance 
application because he did not disclose that he resided in Egypt from July 2002 to 
March. Applicant admitted the omission and asserted he made a mistake when he 
completed the application. After listening to him and observing his demeanor, I believe 
that the omission was an oversight. Hence, this allegation is found in his favor. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his initial March 2004 
security clearance application because he did not disclose that he used marijuana on a 
daily basis between January 2001 and February 2004, approximately one month before 
he completed the application. Applicant admitted that he lied. Hence, the disqualifying 
condition set forth in AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
AG ¶ 17 includes six conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising 
under this guideline. I have considered four of them: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
 
 
9
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
Applicant disclosed his marijuana use in the April 2007 security clearance, 
approximately three years after he completed his initial application. It is not clear when 
he voluntarily disclosed it or whether it was prior to April 2007. Hence, there is 
insufficient evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 17(a) as to the allegation in SOR 
¶ 2.b. The offense was not so minor as to be mitigated by the passage of five years. 
Neither AG ¶ 17(c) or AG ¶ 7(d) have application. Applicant produced evidence that he 
has taken steps to reduce his vulnerability to duress based on his subsequent 
disclosure of his former drug use. AG ¶ 7(e) has some application.  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant admitted that he has a $15,000 delinquent debt that dates back to 
2003-2004 and relates to his divorce. The evidence raised the above disqualifications. 
 
 
 
 
10
AG ¶ 20 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I 
considered three of them: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
The delinquent debt relates to legal fees Applicant incurred during his 2003 
divorce. That situation was beyond his control. However, there is no evidence that he 
took responsible action to resolve the debt until April 2009. Hence, AG ¶ 20 (b) does not 
have full application. Other than his testimony, Applicant did not present evidence that 
he received any financial counseling or that his financial situation is under control. 
Although he submitted evidence that within the past two months he paid $100 to each 
law firm and that he intends to continue making payments in the future, he did not 
provide a written agreement confirming that arrangement. There is insufficient evidence 
to apply either AG ¶ 20(c) or AG ¶ 20(d).  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a): They are as follows:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
11
In Foreign Influence cases, the Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis 
address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an 
applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or 
her social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
Some mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature educated person, who came to the United States in 1994 to 
marry his wife and start a family. Both of his children were born in the United States and 
reside here. He has a strong sense of patriotism toward the United States. He 
surrendered his Egyptian passport in 2005, when he learned that it posed an obstacle to 
obtaining a security clearance. There is no evidence he has ever taken any action that 
could cause potential harm to the United States.  
 
Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis.  
First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and various human rights abuses in Egypt. 
More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to the United States and 
actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could 
attempt to use Applicant’s siblings to obtain such information. Second, he had 
numerous connections to Egypt before he permanently immigrated to the United States 
in 1994, including his education and numerous family members and friends, who 
continue to reside there. Third, his three sisters are resident citizens of Egypt with whom 
he maintains (admirably) close contact. Fourth, he has a financial interest in a bank 
account there that he wants to save for emergencies. Fifth, since becoming a U. S. 
citizen in June 1999, he made seven trips to Egypt, the last being in 2005. During one of 
those trips, he remained seven months and married a woman, whom he shortly 
thereafter divorced. Sixth, he relied on his dual citizenship in 1999 and 2002 to import 
cars and circumvent custom taxes. His ties to Egypt are not insignificant.   
 
In addition to those facts, I also considered Applicant’s decision to falsify his 
March 2004 security application regarding his three years of illegal marijuana use. 
Although he repeatedly asserted that he has changed his life since 2004 and that he 
would never falsify information requested from the Government again, he did not 
sufficiently demonstrate a pattern of exercising good judgment or document a track 
record of financial responsibility at this time. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person, and listening to Applicant testify, I have serious concerns about his eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising under foreign influence, personal conduct, and 
financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
