                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-08081 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised. The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
 
1  Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 18, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM), dated May 26, 2009, was provided to him by letter 
dated May 26, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on June 3, 2009. He was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. He did not submit any materials, comments, or objections in response the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old engineering data manager.2 He attended college level 
courses at three separate institutions from January 2001 to May 2005. The FORM does 
not indicate whether he was awarded a degree or how many college credit hours he has 
earned. He has been married since July 1997, and has a 15-year-old stepson and an 
11-year-old daughter. He did not serve in the military. He disclosed no police record; no 
use of illegal drugs; and no alcohol-related problems, counseling or treatment. He has 
worked for the same employer, a government contractor, since May 2006. Applicant 
seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his employment. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial problems and 
included the review of credit reports from April 2008 (Item 5), November 2008 (Item 6), 
and May 2009 (Item 7). Additionally, it considered Applicant’s answers to DOHA 
interrogatories (Items 8 and 9), which included an April 2008 Office of Personnel 
Management Personal Subject Interview and a Personal Financial Statement. 
 
The DOHA interrogatories asked Applicant (in part) to explain or document the 
status of 14 delinquent accounts totaling $118,284. Applicant explained that he lost his 
job and after finding a new job, he experienced a reduced salary of approximately 50%. 
Applicant was unemployed for a three-month period from October 2002 to December 
2002.3 He stated he has been unable to remain current on his bills as a result of being 
unemployed or underemployed. His wife, who handled the family budget, determined 
which bills would be paid. His Personal Financial Statement includes the income of his 
full and part-time job as well as his wife’s salary. Referring to his Personal Financial 
 
 2 Item 4 (March 2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
3 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Statement, Applicant stated, “As you can see there is barely enough to meet the 
monthly obligations, let alone, any past debts” (Item 9). 
 
Applicant failed to address any of his delinquent debts. He failed to provide any 
information as to how he acquired the debts, why they became delinquent, what efforts 
he took, if any, to resolve his debts, and what measures he has taken to avoid similar 
financial problems in the future. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
4 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his answers to 
DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response.  
 
Applicant has submitted no documentation to show he has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the debts alleged in SOR. He admitted responsibility for the 14 
unpaid delinquent debts totaling $118,284.00. The government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). Considering the record as a whole, I 
 
5 “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
conclude his debts are valid delinquent debts, and that Applicant is responsible for 
them.  
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing and his evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
  
 Applicant presented some evidence that established circumstances beyond his 
control contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his three-month period of 
unemployment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only partially. Applicant’s evidence is not 
sufficient to show: 1) why he was unemployed; 2) to what extent this period of 
unemployment affected his current financial situation; and 3) whether he acted 
responsibly and with judgment under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of effort to contact creditors or to resolve his 
debts by entering into settlement agreements or payment plans with any creditors. 
Other than the above-mentioned period of unemployment, he has been consistently 
employed. He presented no evidence of efforts to resolve any of his delinquent debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because, there are no clear indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. His inability to pay his debts 
shows he is financially overextended. He also failed to present any evidence that he 
received financial counseling, and that his financial problems are not likely to recur. The 
remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
he has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that he has taken control 
of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems are 
recent, not isolated, and are likely to be a concern in the future. He has not carried his 
burden of proving his financial responsibility. His overall financial behavior casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of employment working for a government contractor weighs in 
his favor. Aside from his delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-criminal issue), he is a 
law-abiding citizen. These factors show some responsibility and mitigation.   
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a significant history of delinquent debt that has been ongoing. Applicant submitted no 
documentation to show he has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
debts, that he has attempted to contact his creditors to settle or resolve debts alleged in 
the SOR, or that he is receiving or has ever received financial counseling to assist him 
with his financial difficulties. Applicant has not produced evidence showing that he has 
acted responsibly or prudently in managing his financial affairs over several years, and 
 
7 
 
 
it is clear from the record that Applicant’s financial problems are recent and appear 
likely to be a continuing concern in the future.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.    
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.n.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
