 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08974 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Diana J. Veilleux, Esq., and Marian N. Coleman, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines K (Handling 
Protected Information), M (Use of Information Technology Systems), and E (Personal 
Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an application to continue his security clearance on March 
14, 2008. On January 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
revoke his clearance, citing security concerns under Guidelines K, M, and E. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 30, 2009. He answered it through 
counsel on February 18, 2009; and he requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on February 19, 2009. Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed on April 6, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on April 7, 2009. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 27, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 19, 
2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 11 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record closed upon adjournment of the hearing on May 19, 2009. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on May 27, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old staff analyst for a federal contractor. He has held a 
security clearance since May 2003. He has worked for his current employer since 
March 2008. He previously worked for another federal contractor for about 22 years. He 
resigned from his previous employment in lieu of termination and was unemployed from 
November 2007 until March 2008. The conduct alleged in the SOR occurred while he 
was working for his previous employer. Applicant testified his current employer is aware 
of the allegations in the SOR (Tr. 54). 
 
 On March 22, 2007, Applicant moved two classified computers from one 
classified area to another. He obtained the approval of his group leader and deputy 
group leader in advance, but he did not notify his information systems security officer 
(ISSO) (GX 4 at 4). He moved the computers because he believed the limitations on 
network access imposed by the ISSO at the old location limited his ability to do his job 
(Tr. 65).  
 
On March 29, 2007, Applicant attended a meeting about moving classified 
computers. He testified this meeting was about computers other than the two he had 
requested approval to move (Tr. 85), but security investigators found that the meeting 
was to discuss his requested move (GX 4 at 4). He told an investigator and he testified 
that he disclosed at the meeting that he had moved his two computers on the day 
before the meeting (GX 4 at 13). One of the attendees at the meeting told investigators 
Applicant did not disclose the move of the computers at the meeting (GX 4 at 7).  
 
On March 30, 2007, the computers were discovered to be missing from their old 
location. When interviewed, Applicant stated he moved the computers on March 28, 
2007. Access logs reflected that Applicant entered the secure location to which he had 
moved the computers on March 22, but not on March 28.  
 
Applicant also told investigators he complied with an informal “two-man rule” for 
moving classified equipment, and he named the employee who accompanied him. 
When advised that the employee denied participating in the move, Applicant named a 
second employee, who also denied participating in the move.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Finally, Applicant stated he carried the two computers in a locked security bag. 
An employee who observed Applicant entering the new location informed investigators 
that Applicant was carrying only one computer and it was not in a bag, but the witness 
admitted he “could not be absolute” about the number of computers Applicant was 
carrying (GX 4 at 12).  
 
Applicant testified he did not know why he misidentified the person who escorted 
him during the movement of the computers. He testified he “just got them confused.” He 
denied intending to give the investigators incorrect information (Tr. 48-49). 
 
Applicant testified he realized he had given the wrong date for moving the 
computers when he was reviewing his statement to the investigators. He explained that 
he was focused on moving the computers and the date “stuck in [his] head.” He could 
give no other explanation for the discrepancy (Tr. 70-71). He denied intentionally giving 
false or misleading information to the investigators (Tr. 49-51).  
 
Applicant was first interviewed on May 2, 2007. He did not correct his statement 
regarding the date he moved the computers until June 7, 2007, when he was confronted 
with the discrepancies in his first statement. He did not address his misidentification of 
the person who accompanied him until he was interviewed again on June 18, 2007. 
 
Applicant testified he moved the computers in a locked bag. He testified he is 
confident he moved the computers in a locked bag because the security officers in the 
new location would have cited him for a security infraction and refused to accept them if 
they had been transported incorrectly (Tr. 51-52). However, the security investigation 
concluded that there was no formal policy on transporting classified computers (GX 4 at 
14; Tr. 116).  
 
Although it was “common practice” to notify the ISSO when moving classified 
computers, there was no formal written guidance requiring it (GX 5 at 3). Applicant 
testified he was aware of the “two-man rule” but was unaware of other policies 
regarding movement of computers from one secure area to another. He also testified he 
did not intend to violate his employer’s policies when he moved the computers (Tr. 32). 
On June 20, 2007, after Applicant moved his computers, an email was distributed 
announcing a requirement to notify the ISSO when any classified computers are moved 
(GX 4 at 18-19). 
 
During the inquiry into the move of the two computers, investigators also 
discovered that Applicant had failed to update his inventory database, failed to obtain 
ISSO approval for switching disks on classified computers, failed to activate a password 
screen lock on a classified computer, and failed to mark his media while working in a 
mixed media environment (GX 4 at 8-9). The computers were in a storeroom and not 
connected to the network (GX 4 at 6).The investigators concluded there was no 
suspected unauthorized disclosure of classified information (GX 4 at 4).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant told investigators and testified he believed that the local rules allowed 
disks to be removed and replaced for testing and maintenance for up to five days 
without notifying the ISSO and updating the documentation (GX 4 at 26). He testified he 
could not recall whether he was performing tests or maintenance when he changed the 
disks on his computer (Tr.38).  
 
Applicant also testified he was required to activate a password screen lock on 
any computer for which he was responsible. He testified he could not respond 
specifically to the allegation because he could not determine who was responsible for 
the computers referred to by the investigators (Tr. 40).  
 
The local rules applicable to the secure local area network required marking of all 
classified and unclassified media in mixed media work areas (GX 5 at 10). Applicant 
testified he and the security staff had marked everything in his office “within weeks” 
before his access was suspended. He testified it was possible that something was 
overlooked, but he could not determine what improperly marked items the investigators 
found (Tr. 41).  
 
Applicant’s access to classified areas was withdrawn on April 5, 2007 (GX 4 at 
5). While the investigation of the moving of computers was ongoing and Applicant’s 
access to classified areas was suspended, he voluntarily underwent retraining in 
security procedures (Tr. 28).  
 
The local rules applicable to the secure local area network prohibited use of 
external memory sticks, thumb drives, or similar devices; and they prohibited making 
any configuration changes to computer systems without prior ISSO approval (GX 5 at 
11). On May 9, 2007, a thumb drive was found on the employer’s property. Based on a 
review of the contents on the thumb drive, it was identified as Applicant’s property. The 
thumb drive contained personal photographs, work documents, and a short sexually-
explicit video-clip. The work documents were unclassified but were marked Official Use 
Only (GX 4 at 15). 
 
Applicant told investigators he did not use the thumb drive at work. At the 
hearing, he testified he sometimes emailed documents from work to his home computer 
and he used his thumb drive to transfer documents between his home computer and his 
work computer (Tr. 97-99). 
 
Applicant told investigators he carried the thumb drive with a chain hooked to his 
belt, and it was lost when the chain broke (GX 4 at 15). At the hearing, he testified he 
believed he had dropped the thumb drive between two “packets” of his work bag and it 
dropped out as he was walking from his car to his office. He did not know he had lost 
the thumb drive until he was notified by security that it had been found. He testified he 
believed it would have been a security violation to carry the thumb drive into a secured 
area, but the thumb drive was lost after his access to secured areas had been 
withdrawn. He testified he had forgotten about the sexually explicit video clip (Tr. 42-
45). 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant had a reputation for “flying under the radar” regarding security rules 
and procedures. In March 2006, he violated the organization’s “extended security plan” 
by transferring three classified hard drives from one location to another without notifying 
anyone (GX 4 at 14). In September 2006, a group administrator complained to 
Applicant’s supervisor about Applicant’s lack of cooperation on updating inventories (GX 
4 at 8). Applicant’s supervisor told security investigators that Applicant had a history of 
“operating independently from [his organization’s] procedures,” making his co-workers 
uncomfortable working with him (GX 4 at 6). Applicant’s deputy office director told 
security investigators Applicant had received several warnings during the past two to 
three years about his security behavior (GX 4 at 5).  
 
 On November 7, 2007, Applicant was notified he was being terminated for cause. 
The termination notice recited that he exhibited a “cavalier attitude” toward security and 
a willingness to bend the rules. It also recited that he deliberately provided misleading 
information to his supervisors and the security investigators (GX 3). Applicant was 
allowed to resign in lieu of termination (Answer to SOR; GX 2 at 5). He testified he did 
not file a grievance to “clear his name,” because he had no desire to continue working 
for that employer (Tr. 62). The “Report by Office Concerned” dated November 28, 2007, 
recited that Applicant “historically had difficulty in adequately following all details 
involved with security” and had been counseled numerous times (GX 4 at 17). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
6 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant’s access to classified areas at his place of 
employment was suspended in March-April 2007 because of his noncompliance with 
security procedures. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges he acted without authorization and in violation 
of security procedures when transferring a computer at his place of employment, and he 
was counseled and retrained in security procedures because of this violation and other 
unspecified incidents. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges he violated security policies and procedures by 
bringing a thumb drive onto his place of employment that contained work product and 
pornography, he lost the thumb drive but did not report its loss, and the thumb drive was 
found in an unsecure location. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges he was reprimanded, recommended 
for termination for cause, and escorted from his place of employment because of his 
violations of rules and regulations and deliberately providing misleading information to 
his managers and security personnel.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: “Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an individual's 
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such 
information, and is a serious security concern.” The relevant potentially disqualifying 
conditions are AG ¶ 34(g) (“any failure to comply with rules for the protection of 
classified or other sensitive information”) and AG ¶ 34(h) (“negligence or lax security 
habits that persist despite counseling by management”).  
SOR ¶ 1.a does not allege any security violations separate from those alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d. Instead, it merely alleges the actions of his supervisors in response to 
those violations. It essentially duplicates SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d. When the same conduct is 
alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 
21, 2005) at 3. Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.a in Applicant’s favor. 
Applicant’s transfer of his classified computers to a new location raised questions 
whether he properly notified the appropriate officials of the move and whether he 
executed the move in accordance with prescribed security procedures. The evidence 
shows he obtained the approval of his supervisors for the intended move, but he did not 
notify the ISSO responsible for the computers at the old location. The evidence also 
shows there was no formal, published rule requiring notification of the ISSO. The 
requirement for ISSO notification was published after Applicant moved the computers.  
Applicant was aware of an informal, unpublished “two-man rule” for moving 
classified equipment, but his conflicting statements raise a question whether he 
complied with it. The evidence is also conflicting on the question whether Applicant 
transported the computers in a locked bag. It is not necessary to resolve these conflicts, 
however, because the local security procedures did not provide specific guidance for 
transporting classified computers. The investigators determined that there was no 
compromise of classified information. Based on this record, I conclude the evidence 
does not support a finding that Applicant violated any rules when he moved the two 
computers.1 
SOR ¶ 1.b also alleges there were “other incidents” of rules violations that 
resulted in later counseling and retraining. The “other incidents” alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
are supported by substantial evidence of Applicant’s failure to update his inventory 
database, failure to obtain ISSO approval for switching disks, failure to activate a 
password screen lock, and failure to mark his media.  
Applicant testified he believed carrying his thumb drive into a secure area would 
be a security violation, but he admitted occasional use of the thumb drive to transfer 
                                                          
1  Applicant’s former employer was not an agency under the jurisdiction of the Department of Defense. I 
cannot determine whether his conduct violated any applicable departmental regulations or directives 
because no evidence of the rules promulgated by the department having jurisdiction over his former 
employer was presented. 
 
8 
 
 
documents between his home computer and his work computer. The local rules 
specifically prohibited use of thumb drives without prior ISSO approval. The work 
documents on the thumb drive were Official Use Only, and as such were “sensitive 
information” within the meaning of this guideline. Applicant’s failure to notice or report 
the loss of his thumb drive containing sensitive information does not establish a 
deliberate security violation, but it does indicate negligence. 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges the actions taken by Applicant’s supervisors for the violations 
alleged in of SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, and it additionally alleges that Applicant deliberately 
provided misleading information to managers and security personnel. This latter 
allegation is supported by evidence that when Applicant was interviewed by security 
investigators he misstated the date he moved the computers, misidentified his escort for 
the movement of the computers, and denied using the thumb drive at work. 
 Based on the foregoing, I conclude there is substantial evidence raising the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 34(g) and (h), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” AG 35(a). The first prong of this 
mitigating condition (“so much time has elapsed”) focuses on whether the conduct was 
recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@  The 
determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence.  
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@  Id.   
More than two years have elapsed since Applicant’s security violations. However, 
he was under investigation and his access to classified materials was suspended until 
he resigned in lieu of termination in November 2007. He was unemployed from 
November 2007 until he began his current job in March 2008. Since March 2008, he 
has been under the pressure of trying to keep his clearance. Under these 
circumstances, I conclude that Applicant’s conduct was “recent” because he has not 
worked for his current employer long enough to demonstrate reform or rehabilitation.  
Applicant has a record of multiple security infractions that did not occur under 
unusual circumstances. The circumstances under which he left his previous 
employment cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
conclude AG ¶ 35(a) is not established. 
 
9 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now demonstrates 
a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” AG 35(b). Applicant 
underwent remedial security training, but he has not worked long enough in a classified 
environment since his resignation in lieu of termination to demonstrate the “positive 
attitude” required for this mitigating condition. 
Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “the security violations were due to 
improper or inadequate training.” AG ¶ 35(c). The security investigators found a lack of 
guidance in several areas of security concern, but the guidance was specific and clear 
regarding marking of media, password protection, and use of external devices such as 
thumb drives. Applicant’s responses during the security investigation and at the hearing 
demonstrated that he was familiar with the formal, written guidance as well as the 
informal common practices at his workplace. I conclude AG ¶ 35(c) is not established. 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the same conduct discussed above under this guideline. 
The concern under this guideline is: “Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines 
or regulations pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness 
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.” AG ¶ 39.  
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 40(f) (“introduction, removal, or 
duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information 
technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, 
guidelines, or regulations”) and AG ¶ 40(g) (“negligence or lax security habits in 
handling information technology that persist despite counseling by management”). The 
evidence raises both of these disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” AG 41(a). Applicant’s security violations 
were recent and did not happen under unusual circumstances. His record of multiple 
violations after repeated counseling precludes a finding that they are unlikely to recur. 
His record casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude 
AG 41(a) is not established. No other enumerated mitigating conditions are relevant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The conduct alleged under Guidelines K and M is also cross-alleged under this 
guideline. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
10 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition regarding the information provided by 
Applicant during the security investigation is “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(b). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. A factual misstatement, standing alone, does not prove an 
applicant’s state of mind. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as 
a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the misstatement.  See ISCR Case No. 03-
09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 I found Applicant’s explanations for initially misstating the date he moved the 
computers and the identity of the persons who accompanied him implausible and not 
credible. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 16(b) is raised.  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers during a security 
investigation may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant was first interviewed on May 2, 2007. He did not 
correct his statement regarding the date he moved the computers until he was 
questioned on June 7, 2007, and confronted with the discrepancies in his first 
statement. He did not address his misidentification of the person who accompanied him 
until he was interviewed on June 18, 2007. AG ¶ 17(a) is not established because 
Applicant’s corrections of his misstatements were not prompt and did not occur until he 
was confronted with the evidence. No other mitigating conditions are relevant to his 
statements to security investigators. 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions for Applicant’s security violations are AG ¶¶ 
16(c) and (d). AG ¶ 16(c) applies when there is:  
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
11 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies when there is: 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.”  
 
AG ¶ 16(d) condition encompasses “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.” AG ¶ 
16(d)(3). Applicant’s security infractions raise AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d). 
 
 Security concerns arising from rules violations may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
infractions were numerous and did not happen under unique circumstances. Some of 
Applicant’s infractions were arguably minor, but when considered in totality they cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 
17(d). Applicant has acknowledged some of his infractions. He has attended remedial 
training and he is working in a new environment. Given his track record, however, I am 
not satisfied that his behavior is not likely to recur. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not fully 
established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
12 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines K, M, and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who worked for his previous employer for 22 years 
and held a clearance for many years. The investigation into his move of two classified 
computers revealed that many security procedures at his previous place of employment 
were informal, and there no procedures published for certain actions, such as moving 
classified computers. Nevertheless, Applicant was aware of the informal “two-man rule” 
and he believed there was a requirement that classified computers be transported in a 
locked bag. He also was familiar with the published local rules prohibiting use of 
external devices such as thumb drives. His track record of repeated security lapses and 
his false responses to security investigators raise serious questions about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines K, M, 
and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under these guidelines. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
