  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------  )
SSN: ------------------------ ) ISCR Case No. 08-05481
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 9, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to
an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
2
here fall under Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline J for criminal
conduct. 
Applicant replied to the SOR on March 5, 2009. The hearing took place on June
4, 2009. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 12, 2009. For the reasons discussed
below, this case is decided against Applicant.
Findings of Fact
Applicant replied to the SOR as follows: (1) he admitted 19 delinquent debts for
approximately $22,320 and an unpaid judgment for $477; and (2) he admitted two
incidents of domestic violence involving his then second wife, which resulted in his
arrest in 1996 and 2000. In closing argument, department counsel wisely conceded that
the criminal conduct matters were mitigated, and so, those matters need no further
discussion herein (Tr. at 77–78). Based on the record evidence as a whole, the
following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is a high-school
graduate who has worked as a warehouse product specialist for the same company
since 1999. His gross income for 2008 was about $49,000, and his wife earned about
$21,000. He is seeking to retain a security clearance for his employment with a
company engaged in defense contracting. 
Applicant married for the third time in August 2008. His first two marriages ended
in divorce. He has fathered six children (two per wife). Currently, there are five children
(which includes two stepchildren) living in his household. He is paying court-ordered
child support via garnishments for a total of about $760 monthly for two children from
his second marriage. He has a child-support arrearage of about $1,100 (Tr. at 65).
The record evidence proves that Applicant has a well-established history of
financial problems. In addition to his admissions to the SOR allegations, two credit
reports document his history of financial problems (Exhibits 3 and 4). Applicant has not
paid in full, made payment arrangements, settled, or otherwise resolved any of the 19
delinquent debts or the unpaid judgment. 
In addition to the SOR allegations, Applicant admitted that he and his first wife
sought and obtained a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge of indebtedness in 1991 (Exhibit
5). He attributed the bankruptcy to youth and immaturity (Tr. at 58).  Applicant is also
indebted to the IRS for past-due taxes. The IRS is garnishing his wages for $200 per
month. Applicant believes he owes taxes for tax year 2008, and he is working on that
issue.  
Applicant and his current wife are in the process of filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy
petition to address their joint indebtedness (Exhibit A). He retained a bankruptcy
attorney in June 2008, but was unable to take further action in filing a bankruptcy case
because he could not afford the attorney’s fees. In May 2009, he and his wife found a
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a2
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).6
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.7
3
more affordable arrangement, and they anticipate filing the bankruptcy petition soon.
The working papers for the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case reveal a total indebtedness for
unsecured creditors of $86,722 (Exhibit A at 10–13). Of note, that figure includes a joint
debt of $33,327 that Applicant has with his second ex-wife for property in her
possession. Also, the working papers contain a budget-analysis summary with a
negative cash flow of $1,350 per month (Exhibit A at 10–13). Applicant admitted these
figures are an accurate reflection of his financial condition (Tr. at 66–68).
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his second marriage. Although
divorced in 2008, it was preceded by a long separation period. Applicant and his then
second wife separated between 1999 and 2000. This long separation period resulted in
additional costs and expenses. Also, Applicant had a brief period of unemployment or
underemployment due to a strike during November 2006–January 2007. Otherwise, he
has been continuously employed by the same company for the last ten years.   
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.2
As noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant3
to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any4
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether5
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An7
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 10
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).11
 The nine factors of the whole-person concept are set forth in the Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and m itigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 15
4
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate8
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme9
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.10
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept.  A person granted access to classified12
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
5
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems raises security concerns because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The available information is17
more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. It also establishes a
pattern of financial irresponsibility. 
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. MC 1 does not apply because his financial problems are lengthy and
ongoing. His second marriage (the multi-year separation and divorce) no doubt
contributed to Applicant’s financial problems. But MC 2 does not apply because the
evidence does not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. MC 3
does not apply because his financial problems are ongoing, he has yet to file the
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, and it is far too soon to conclude that his financial
problems are being resolved or under control. MC 4 does not apply because the
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 18
6
evidence, to include the pending Chapter 7 bankruptcy case, does not establish a good-
faith effort to address his delinquent debts. And neither MC 5 nor MC 6 apply given the
facts and circumstances here.  
I considered this case in light of the whole-person concept  and it does not18
support a favorable decision. At this time, Applicant’s financial problems are
overwhelming. He is in the middle of financial turmoil. It will be some time before he will
be able to put his financial house in good order and then establish a track record of
financial responsibility. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant did not meet
his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.t:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
