                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07197
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 30, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 16, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 4).  On February 20, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 20, 2009, in which she
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on April 7, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on April 20, 2009, and she submitted no reply.  The case was assigned to the
undersigned for resolution on June 18, 2009.
2
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 45 years old.  She is employed by a defense contractor as an
Aircraft Mechanic and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with her
employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk
of  having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admits all of the allegations in the SOR, namely that she is
indebted to six different creditors, incurred over the course of several years, totaling
approximately $16,772.00.  Credit Reports of the Applicant dated April 3, 2009, June
25, 2008, and February 14, 2008, reflect that the following debts remain owing: a debt
owed to AFNI-Bloom in the amount of $1,789.00, a debt for medical services in the
amount of $134.00, a debt to Palisades Coll, in the amount of $7,556.00, a debt owed to
Verizon in the amount $1,197.00, a debt owed to Citifinancia in the amount of $5,862.00
and a debt owed to CRD PRT ASSO in the amount of $234.00.  (Government Exhibits
7, 8 and 9).   
Applicant explains that her indebtedness was a result of a degenerative neck
condition that required neck surgery and caused her to miss work in 2004.  At that time,
her paycheck was substantially reduced and her bills became delinquent.  Applicant
indicates that she plans to pay the debts, but she does not present any reasonable plan
as to how she will do so. 
In April 2008, when she was interviewed by the DoD, she indicated that she was
current with all of her monthly expenses, but had very little money left at the end of the
month.  At that time, she was also facing another surgery for her neck, which would
mean more time off for recovery.  She further indicated that when she returned in three
or four months from her surgery, she would begin to research her delinquent accounts
and begin paying them off.  Although she had conferred with two or three debt
consolidation companies, she had never signed a contract with one or started the
process of financial rehabilitation.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6).  
In her answer to the SOR, the Applicant simply admits each of the allegations set
forth in paragraph 1, requests an decision without a hearing, and does not present any
evidence in mitigation.  (Government Exhibit 3).  
3
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation; 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
4
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
5
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case. Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying
Conditions 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19.(c) a history of not
meeting financial obligation apply.  Mitigating Condition 20.(b) the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances also
applies, but is not controlling in this case.  
The Applicant has not shown sufficient good judgment since her medical
conditions began in 2004.  Admittedly, her medical condition primarily caused the
Applicant’s financial demise.  Since then, she has experienced additional medical
problems and has still not paid her delinquent debts.  However, she has failed to
present any evidence to show that she has consulted with a financial counselor to assist
her with her finances, or that she has set up payment plans or made any other
arrangements to get her delinquent debts paid.  She has not explained her current
circumstances that could be mitigating.  Under the circumstances, she has not made a
good faith effort to resolve her indebtedness, and there is insufficient evidence of
financial rehabilitation.  The Applicant has not demonstrated that she can properly
handle her financial affairs.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, however, it does not come close
to mitigating the negative effects of her financial indebtedness and its impact on her
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing her request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
6
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
   
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
