 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
         
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-09127 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On May 12, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 24, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 31, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On June 4, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to 
 
 
 
 
2
me. On June 16, 2009, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing. The case was heard on July 
9, 2009, as scheduled.  Department counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through S into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on July 20, 2009.                             
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the SOR except 
those contained in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g.  
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and married. His wife is 22 years old. They have a 15-
month old son.  He completed an associate’s degree in computer information in 2006 
and will finish a bachelor’s degree in business management in December 2009. His wife 
begins student teaching in the fall and will graduate with a degree in education next 
spring. 
 
 In 2001, Applicant received his first credit card. At the time, he was 19 years old 
and living on his own. He used the card for living expenses while attending college 
because his part-time job did not cover all of his debts. He admits that from 2001 until 
2004, he mismanaged his money and had no financial understanding of the 
ramifications of accruing delinquent debt through credit cards. (Tr. 24-27) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CRB) dated June 2008 and February 2009, the 
SOR alleged seven delinquent debts, totaling $14,652. The status of the debts is as 
follows. 
 
 1.  SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $6,747 judgment owed to a university credit union. This 
debt was a personal loan for an automobile he purchased in December 2004.  
The debt remains unpaid, but Applicant has been in contact with the creditor. 
He intends to pay it when money becomes available. (Tr. 32-33; AE H) 
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $373 debt owed to a cell phone company.  This debt was 
paid on May 22, 2009. (Tr. 33; AE C) 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $2,584 debt owed to a credit card company. The original 
debt was $500. This was Applicant’s first credit card, which he received in 
2002. He has made two offers to the company for settlement. AE I is a 
summary of those offers. He is waiting for a reply. (Tr. 33-36; AE K)  
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $78 debt owed to an insurance company. This debt was 
paid on March 31, 2009.  
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $775 debt owed to a credit card company.  This debt 
was paid in May 2009. (Tr. 37; AE E) 
 
 
 
 
 
3
6. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $3,389 debt owed to a university for room and board for 
the year of 2005. This debt was paid on May 15, 2009. (Tr. 38; AE F) 
 
7. SOR ¶ 1.g alleges a $706 debt owed to a storage company. This debt was 
paid on March 30, 2009. (Tr. 39; AE G) 
      
   In summary, Applicant paid five of the seven debts since March 2009. He has 
contacted one of the two remaining unpaid creditors and will pay the debt when he 
reaches a settlement.  He intends to contact the other creditor and start making small 
monthly payments if acceptable by the creditor. (Tr. 49) He anticipates that the 
remaining debt of $9,461 will be resolved and paid within the next nine months. (AE K) 
 
 Applicant has not participated in a formal credit counseling course, but has 
received financial advice from his father. He has also taken accounting and finance 
courses in conjunction with his business management program. (Tr. 57-78)  
      
 In May 2008, Applicant started his current full-time position as a head server at a 
restaurant. He also attends school full time. He and his wife are managing on their tight 
budget through frugal spending. (Tr. 44-45) He has not incurred any additional debt 
since 2004 other than his car loan, which he pays regularly. (Tr. 55) If he obtains a 
security clearance, he will begin work as a team leader for a federal contractor and 
many of his financial problems will be resolved with a higher salary. His prospective 
employer has held a position open for Applicant over the last year.  (Tr. 30, 47; AE L) 
He also intends to continue working at the restaurant on a part-time basis to help pay 
his two outstanding debts. (Tr. 55) 
 
 Applicant testified candidly and credibly. He presented his case in a very 
organized manner and demonstrated a commitment to achieving financial solvency. He 
was an impressive 26-year-old man who will have a successful career in the future. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
4
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an  
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
 
 
 
5
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Between 2001 and 2004, Applicant accumulated approximately $14,652 of 
delinquent debt that he was unwilling or unable to pay until sometime in March 2009. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. 
AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant accumulated several debts between 2001 and 2004 that were the 
result of poor financial management and imprudent use of credit cards. He did not begin 
resolving them until 2009. Because the debts are not isolated and have been ongoing 
for several years, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant admitted that he mishandled his 
finances during that period of time. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant has not 
taken a formal financial counseling course, but has spoken to his father and completed 
college courses in accounting and finance as part of his business management 
curriculum. Based on that and other evidence, there are clear indications that the debts 
are being resolved and his finances are under control, triggering the application of AG ¶ 
 
 
 
 
6
20(c). Applicant paid five of the seven debts and is negotiating with another creditor. 
Those actions are evidence of his good-faith effort to resolve the debts and warrant the 
application of AG ¶ 20(d). There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20 (e) 
or AG ¶ 20(f).  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 26-year-old man who 
mismanaged his money and credit when he was 19-years-old and attending college. 
Since learning of the Government’s security concerns, he has demonstrated a 
commitment to resolving those debts. Given his awareness of the importance of 
financial responsibility and effect similar problems could have on future employment, 
along with a frugal budget, I do not believe similar financial problems will recur. The 
Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case No. 06-12930, “that an applicant is not required to 
show that she has completely paid off her indebtedness, only that she has established a 
reasonable plan to resolve her debts and has taken ‘significant actions to implement 
that plan.’ ISCR Case No.04-09684 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul.6, 2006).’” In this case, 
Applicant has taken steps to resolve his delinquent debts and establish a track record of 
responsible financial management.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
