                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-01111 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Kurdistan about 55 years ago. In 1976, Applicant fled to 
Iran and then that same year, he settled in the United States. He became a U.S. citizen 
in 1991. His wife was born in Iraq and became a U.S. citizen in 1998. His three children 
are U.S. citizens. Applicant returned to Iraq from 2005 to 2007, and served with U.S. 
combat forces as a translator. Applicant went on hundreds of dangerous patrols with 
U.S. Army personnel. Those who served with him in Iraq laud his duty performance and 
contributions to mission accomplishment. Applicant has significantly greater contacts 
with the United States than with Iraq. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of U.S. interests. Personal Conduct and Foreign Influence security 
concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On May 20, 
2005, he submitted an SF-86 (GE 2). On December 12, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and B (Foreign Influence) 
(GE 12). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 1, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (GE 13). On May 29, 2009, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On June 15, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. On June 25, 
2009, DOHA issued a hearing notice (GE 11). On July 20, 2009, the hearing was held. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 10 exhibits (GE 1-10) (Transcript (Tr.) 36-
37), and Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 18). There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-10 (Tr. 37). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and 
the hearing notice (GE 11-13). I received the transcript on July 24, 2009.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Iraq (AN Request with Ex. I to VI; Tr. 38). Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for these facts. Applicant did not object, and I 
granted Department Counsel’s request (Tr. 38). 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations in his response to the 
SOR (GE 13). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
   
Applicant is 54 or 55 years old (Tr. 8). He was unsure about his date of birth (Tr. 
23). He was born in Kurdistan and when he was old enough he joined the Kurdistan 
liberation forces (Tr. 50). When the Shah of Iran was in power, Applicant served with 
 
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
Iranian forces and other Kurds in opposition to Saddam Hussein (Tr. 30-31). Then Iran 
and Iraq made a treaty and Applicant became a refugee in Iran (Tr. 31). On October 10, 
1976, Applicant immigrated to the United States from Iran (Tr. 32, 43; GE 2). He 
became a U.S. citizen in 1991 (GE 3). 
 
Applicant married in 1981 and divorced in 1988 (GE 2). He married his wife in 
1991 (GE 2). His children were born in the United States in 1982, 1995, and 2004 (GE 
2).  His current wife was born in Iraq and became a U.S. citizen in 1998 (GE 2). 
 
Applicant’s mother, four brothers, sister and father-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Iraq (SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.f and 2.h; Tr. 47-48). His brothers and sister work for 
regional government municipalities (SOR ¶ 1.g). Applicant traveled through Iran on his 
way to Iraq in 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.k). When Applicant was deployed to Iraq from 2005 to 
2007, he called his mother on the telephone (Tr. 49). He does not provide financial 
support to his mother (Tr. 50). He cares about his mother and feels loyalty to her (Tr. 
54). He does not contact his brothers and sisters because when he left home he was a 
teenager and they were much younger (Tr. 50). They have very little in common and he 
does not really know them (Tr. 50; GE 13). His mother is the only relative in Iraq that he 
contacted and communicates to using the telephone, and he only communicates with 
her once or twice a year (Tr. 51-52). His wife may have some contact with her father or 
family living in Iraq (Tr. 52-53). However, he was unsure about the degree of contact his 
wife has with her relatives in Iraq (Tr. 53). 
 
In 2000, Applicant, his wife, and his son visited Applicant’s mother and some 
other relatives in Iraq (Tr. 48; SOR ¶ 1.k; GE 13). This is the most recent time he has 
seen his mother (Tr. 48). His only other trip to visit his mother was about twenty years 
ago (GE 13). 
 
Applicant loves the United States (Tr. 32). He has a wife and three children living 
in the United States (Tr. 32). He owns a car, boat, and house, which are located in the 
United States (Tr. 32). He does not own any property in Iraq. 
 
Applicant has excellent Arabic language skills, and is knowledgeable concerning 
Middle East culture and Islam (Tr. 33-34). He was excited about opposing the terrorists 
and supporting the United States (Tr. 35). He wanted to assist the U.S. Armed Forces 
as a linguist (Tr. 35-36). Applicant served with the U.S. Army for six months of pre-
deployment training and then two years in Iraq in the 2005 to 2007 timeframe (Tr. 27-
28, 59-60). He served with the U.S. Army in Mosul, which is an exceptionally dangerous 
area of Iraq (Tr. 28).  He went on about 300 missions with the U.S Army, patrolling the 
streets, attacking the enemy, and searching for insurgents and weapons (Tr. 29; GE 
13). He is proud to be an American and cherishes living under the U.S. Constitution, the 
rule of law, and the freedoms embodied in American life (Tr. 32). 
 
Names used on SF-86s 
 
In Iraq, when a person is born they receive a one-word first name (Tr. 40). 
Applicant was born at home and does not have a birth certificate (Tr. 44). His mother 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
did not register him in any official Iraqi records when he was born (Tr. 44). Persons born 
in Iraq also retain their father’s first name, their grandfather’s first name, their great 
grandfather’s first name, and their great great grandfather’s first name (Tr. 40). The 
number of names can extend back many generations (Tr. 40). Additionally, his mother 
added the name, “Mohamad,” which is often added to Iraqi names as a blessing (Tr. 44, 
55). Applicant sometimes used five different names in various combinations: his first 
name, his father’s name, his grandfather’s name, Mohamad, and his great grandfather’s 
name (Tr. 41).   
 
When Applicant completed his May 20, 2005 and September 9, 2005 SF-86s he 
used his first name, and two other names. In the section of these SF-86s for “Other 
Names Used,” he indicated his first name, and two other names (GE 1; GE 2). The 
names cited were always his first name and combinations of his father’s name, his 
grandfather’s name, his great grandfather’s name, and/or Mohamad (Tr. 41; GE 1; GE 
2).    
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b state Applicant used various combinations of these five 
names on financial and judicial records after arriving in the United States. However, he 
always used the same first name. He explained that he did not list the various 
combinations of the five names on his SF-86 because he was rushing to complete it at 
his employer’s request (Tr. 24). He was inconsistent in his use of the various names on 
financial and judicial records, as well as on the two SF-86s. His failure to include more 
detailed information about use of multiple names on his SF-86s was inadvertent, not 
intentional, and not intended to deceive (Tr. 24-26, 43-44, 55-59). 
 
Character Evidence 
 
A U.S. Army captain, who utilized Applicant’s assistance as a translator in Iraq, 
provided a letter of recommendation for Applicant (GE 13). The letter lauds Applicant’s 
hard work, dedication, professionalism, competence, and excellence (GE 13). Applicant 
“has unlimited potential and will excel under any circumstance” (GE 13). 
 
On December 18, 2005, at Mosul, Iraq, Major General David M. Rodriguez 
signed a certificate of appreciation for Applicant’s support to Operation Iraqi Freedom III 
(GE 13). The certificate thanks Applicant for his “honor, patriotism, and selfless service 
as an interpreter of Task Force Freedom” (GE 13). 
    
Iraq2 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power 
in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal from power, the United 
States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic institutions in Iraq. The 
 
2The facts in the section concerning Iraq are from Department Counsel’s factual summary, except 
for some comments about the relationship between the United States and Iraq, which are from the U.S. 
Department of State, Background Note: Iraq, Feb. 2008 (AN I, enclosure I) and U.S. Department of State, 
Country Specific Information: Iraq, Oct. 22, 2008 (AN I, enclosure III). 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free elections in 2005, Iraq's 
new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in March 2006.  
 
In 2007, 92% of Iraq’s exports were in crude oil and crude oil materials. Almost 
half of Iraq’s exports went to the United States. The U.S.’ ultimate goal in Iraq is to 
establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that will be an ally of 
the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has invested 
thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. Success 
in Iraq is a high national priority of the United States. 
 
Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
dangerous, volatile and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with U.S. 
and Iraqi aggressive governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in 
Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as state intelligence services. 
       
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and B (Foreign Influence) are the 
relevant security concerns with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false security 
clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
On May 20, 2005, and on September 9, 2005, Applicant signed SF-86s. His SF-
86s asked about “Other Names Used” and Applicant was did not list all the names he 
had used on various documents such as driver’s licenses, immigration documentation, 
and traffic court. He admitted that his answers about other names used were 
incomplete. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply and further review is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
Applicant credibly stated he carelessly rushed through his SF-86s and failed to 
fully explain his use of his first name with combinations of four other family names. He 
did not show the careful, conscientious attention to detail necessary to properly 
complete his SF-86s. I conclude Applicant’s alleged falsifications of his SF-86s are 
mitigated. Although he provided incomplete information on his SF-86s, AG ¶ 17(f) 
applies. The falsification allegations are not substantiated. I am satisfied he did not 
deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose information about his names with intent to 
deceive.3 I find “For Applicant” in the Findings section of this decision with respect to 
SOR ¶ 1.   
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
Applicant and his spouse live in the same household, and were both born in Iraq. 
Applicant’s mother, four brothers, sister and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Iraq (SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.f and 2.h). His brothers and sister work for regional government 
municipalities (SOR ¶ 2.g). He visited his family in Iraq in 2000 (SOR ¶ 2.k). 
 
Although Applicant’s communications with family members living in Iraq are not 
particularly frequent, his spouse may have more frequent, non-casual communications 
with family members living in Iraq. “[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.” ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002). Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. Applicant’s relationship through his 
spouse and through her with family living in Iraq is sufficient to create “a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Applicant’s 
relationship with his spouse creates a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
“obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and [his] desire to help” his 
family living in Iraq. Applicant has deep affection for his mother, who is living in Iraq.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with his spouse and his mother, is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if he has a close 
relationship with even one relative, who has a relationship with other family members 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Iraq with the United States, places a significant, but not insurmountable 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his spouse, 
her family and his mother do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist family living in Iraq.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Iraq seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, his relationship with his spouse and his mother creates a potential conflict 
of interest because his relationship with them is sufficiently close to raise a security 
concern about his desire to assist family members in Iraq by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with his spouse and strong affection for his mother and their 
relationships with family members living in Iraq to raise the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry 
is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to Iraq and 
visited his family in 2000. Applicant has frequent contact with his spouse, who lives with 
him, and infrequent contact with his mother, who lives in Iraq. Applicant has not 
established his wife has infrequent contacts with her family members living in Iraq. He 
has deep affection for his mother, and the infrequency of his contacts with her does not 
completely mitigate security concerns. AG ¶ 8(a) has some partial applicability because 
it is his spouse and mother, and not Applicant, who have the extensive contacts with 
family in Iraq. Because of his spouse and mother’s connections to Iraq, Applicant is not 
able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships 
with his relatives who are Iraq citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has established that 
“[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” In 
1976, Applicant emigrated from Iran to the United States to flee Saddam Hussein’s 
persecution. In 1991, Applicant became a U.S. citizen, and in 1998, his spouse became 
a U.S. citizen. His three children are U.S. citizens. Applicant and his spouse have 
substantial U.S. property, and they do not have any property or investments in Iraq. 
Most importantly, he has served in Iraq with U.S. Armed Forces in a combat zone.  He 
has shown his patriotism, loyalty and fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his spouse and mother and 
through them with their families in Iraq. His spouse and mother frequently communicate 
with family living in Iraq. Some family members have employment with municipal 
governments in Iraq. There is no evidence; however, that terrorists, criminals, the Iraqi 
government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant 
or his family in Iraq or that Iraqi officials have asked Applicant or his family for classified 
or sensitive information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or 
Applicant’s family would be targets for improper Iraqi coercion or exploitation. While the 
government does not have any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such 
record evidence was present, Applicant would have a very heavy evidentiary burden to 
overcome to mitigate foreign influence security concerns.   
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Iraq. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in Iraq. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies because Applicant has no interest in property or bank 
accounts in Iraq. This mitigating condition can only fully mitigate AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through his spouse and mother to family living in 
Iraq are less significant than his strong connections to the United States. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting a foreign influence security concern because of 
Applicant’s connections to Iraq. Applicant and his spouse live in the same household, 
and both of them were born in Iraq. Applicant’s mother, four brothers, his father-in-law, 
and his sister are still residents and citizens of Iraq. He traveled to Iraq and visited his 
mother and possibly other family members in 2000. His spouse may have frequent 
communications with her family members living in Iraq.   
  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Iraq, as well as the dangers existing in Iraq.4 Iraq is a very 
dangerous place because of violence from insurgents and terrorists. Insurgents and 
terrorists continue to threaten the government of Iraq, the interests of the United States, 
U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant 
recognizes his work with the U.S. Armed Forces endangers his family living in Iraq. The 
United States and Iraq are allies in the war on terrorism and the United States is 
committed to the establishment of a free and independent government in Iraq. Iraq and 
the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
The circumstances tending to support approval of a clearance for Applicant are 
more significant. In 1976, Applicant fled Iraq and Iran and settled in the United States. In 
1991, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. His spouse, who was also born in Iraq, became 
a U.S. citizen in 1998. Their three children are U.S. citizens. Applicant returned to Iraq 
and served with U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist/translator from 2005 to 2007. He 
volunteered to go on hundreds of dangerous patrols as part of his translator duties. 
Reliable military personnel serving with him in Iraq laud his duty performance and 
contributions to mission accomplishment. He is 54 or 55 years old. He is mature and 
responsible. He has significantly greater contacts or connections with the United States 
than with Iraq. He has infrequent direct contacts with his relatives living in Iraq. He does 
not own property in Iraq. When he and his spouse were naturalized as U.S. citizens, 
they swore allegiance to the United States. He has often put himself in harm’s way, 
working alongside U.S. Armed Forces on numerous operations. He has made 
significant contributions to national security, fully aware of the risks to himself and his 
family. All these circumstances demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at coercion or 
exploitation. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant’s 
strong connections to the United States and especially to his U.S. family, community 
and his employment as a translator in a combat zone establish “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 8(b), supra at 
pages 11-12. 
 
After weighing the evidence of Applicant’s connections to Iraq and to the United 
States, and all the facts in this decision, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
mitigating the personal conduct and foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”5 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, all the evidence in this decision, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
