                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-08757 
 SSN:------------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James P. Fleisher, Esquire 
             Kirstie N. Bowling, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 6, 2005, Applicant resubmitted and signed his Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86). On December 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 16, 2008. He 
answered the SOR in writing on January 2, 2009, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 5, 2009. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 22, 2009, and I received the case 
 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
2
assignment on February 25, 2009.  DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2009, 
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 11, 2009. The Government offered 
Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection, except for objections to 
several subparts of Exhibit 3, the request for administrative notice on the Taiwanese 
Government. (Tr. 15-22)  Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A to E, and H to M, 
without objection. The Department objected to Applicant’s exhibits F and G, which were 
polygraph test results and the curriculum vitae of the examiner.  I upheld the objections 
and did not receive those two exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 43)  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Taiwan and its government, known as the Republic of China. 
(Tr. at 11-22.) The request and the attached documents were admitted into evidence 
and were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 3. The facts administratively noticed 
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 2, 2009, Applicant admitted all factual 
allegations in ¶¶1.a, to 1.d of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant is 52 years old, married with two children, and works for a defense 
contractor of which he is a vice-president and a founder.  Applicant was born on Taiwan 
in 1957. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in physics at a Taiwanese university. After 
graduation from college in 1980, Applicant served his mandatory military service in the 
Taiwanese Army for two years as a lieutenant in the personnel department.  He 
immigrated to the United States in 1983 on a student visa.   He came to the United 
States to obtain advanced degrees not offered at Taiwan universities. He graduated 
with a master’s degree in 1987, and later a doctorate degree in 1991, both degrees in 
mechanical engineering. Applicant was able to obtain an H1 visa in 1992, and became 
a permanent U.S. resident in 1995.  He became a U.S. citizen in 2000. Applicant has 
voted in U.S. elections, but never in a Taiwanese election. (Tr. 51-78, 100-102, 107, 
112, 134,150; Exhibits 1 and D)  
 
 Applicant is a research scientist and part owner of the company for whom he 
works.  He owns 15% of that company.  He is also an officer and director of the 
company.  He co-founded the company in 1995 after moving to his present state of 
residence.  He has owned homes in that state since then, and raised his children there.  
He does not own any foreign incorporated companies, nor does he have any real estate 
 
 
 
 
3
or financial assets outside the United States.  Applicant owns four cars, one for each 
member of his family. (Tr. 52, 54, 59-62, 88-94, 141-150; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born on Taiwan and came to the United States to advance 
her education.  They met while they were graduate students in the United States.  They 
married on Taiwan during a visit there in 1984.  Their daughter and son were born in the 
United States, and are 23 and 17 years old, respectively.  Applicant’s wife is a chemist 
and safety engineer working for a foreign-owned automobile company.   She became a 
U.S. citizen in 2000 when Applicant became a U.S. citizen.  (Tr. 52, 53, 55-58, 80, 103; 
Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Taiwan eight times since coming to the United States.  Each 
trip was for family visits.  He stayed with family members on each trip to Taiwan. The 
December 1984 to January 1985 trip was for his marriage.  He traveled to Taiwan again 
from December 1987 to January 1988, and July to August 1995, and again in July 1997.  
He attended his father’s funeral on a trip from August to September 2000, visited his 
mother in December 2003, and attended his mother’s funeral in October 2004.  He 
visited his wife’s parents and family on their trip from November to December 2008.  
Each trip after 1997 he reported to his company’s security officer as required by 
company procedures. Applicant has participated in quarterly security training in his 
company since 1997. Applicant did not discuss his work with anyone while on these 
trips. (Tr. 67, 99, 113-127, 143, 157) 
 
 Applicant is the youngest of five children. His oldest sibling is his 62-year-old 
brother.  This brother sells weather instruments for his own company.  Applicant is close 
to him, and calls him about twice a month.  This brother also obtained permanent 
residency status in the United States through his wife’s family.  Applicant’s next oldest 
sibling is his sister, who works for a Taiwanese government research facility.  He does 
not communicate with her, and has only seen her 12 times in the past 26 years.   She 
did not attend one family function because she was working on a project and her 
supervisors prohibited her attendance during that work.  This sister has a Taiwanese 
security clearance.  His next oldest sibling is a brother, who is an architect for a private 
company.  Applicant does not communicate with him by email, and only has had 12 
contacts in the past 26 years.  Applicant’s remaining sibling is a sister, who is a married 
housewife on Taiwan.  He has not had much contact with her in the past 26 years.  All 
his siblings live on Taiwan and are Taiwanese citizens.  Applicant’s parents are 
deceased. They were resident citizens of Taiwan. (Tr. 65-73, 129, 136-138, 144; 
Exhibits 2 and E) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father-in-law live on Taiwan and are citizens of Taiwan.  
His in-laws have permanent residency in the United States through one of his wife’s 
sisters who lives in the United States.  They do not travel much because of their ages.  
(Tr. 127, 143-145; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Until he became a U.S. citizen, Applicant used his Taiwanese passport.  Since 
2000, Applicant has only used his U.S. passport for overseas travel.  His wife has both 
 
 
 
 
4
types of passports, and his children only have U.S. passports. Applicant submitted a 
letter dated May 5, 2009, formally renouncing his Taiwan citizenship if his U.S. 
citizenship oath in 2000 did not accomplish that purpose, which was his intent at the 
time.  His letter also formally surrendered his expired Taiwanese passports. (Tr. 105-
112, 130, 145; Exhibits 1, A to D, L) 
 
 Applicant submitted four character statements from his colleagues at his place of 
employment.  Each writer characterizes Applicant as an intelligent research scientist 
and a valuable member of the team on which he works.  The writers also have known 
Applicant for at least 15 years within the scientific community where they work.  They 
regard him highly as a professional and as a person.  Their comments are detailed and 
persuasive. The president of Applicant’s employing company testified about the security 
procedures the company uses, and that in his experience Applicant has complied with 
all procedures and has not mishandled classified or proprietary information.  He 
recommends Applicant receive a security clearance. This witness also wrote Exhibit K. 
(Tr. 151-163; Exhibits H to K)  
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Taiwan.  The 
Nationalist Government of the late Chinese president Chiang Kai-shek was defeated by 
the Communist forces of Mao Tse-tung in 1948 for control of China.  While the 
Communists established their government on mainland China, the Peoples Republic of 
China (PRC), the Nationalists fled to the island of Taiwan and re-established their 
government there (the Republic of China).  Taiwan has a population of 23 million 
people, and a multi-party parliamentary democracy has evolved over the past 60 years. 
Taiwan did $466 billion in trade in 2007, having developed a strong economy over the 
years. In 1979 the United States formally changed its recognition from Taiwan to the 
Communist PRC government on the mainland of China as the sole legal government of 
China. The United States maintains an unofficial relationship with Taiwan under the 
1979 Taiwan Relations Act, and sells defense military equipment to Taiwan pursuant to 
that law. Taiwan is known as an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence.  Taiwan 
maintains a large military establishment against the PRC government.  (Exhibits 3 and 
M) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
 
 
 
5
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
 
 
 
6
                                                          
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s family members and his wife’s parents are citizens and residents of 
Taiwan.  One of his sisters works for a Taiwan government research facility and has a 
security clearance granted by that Government.  Applicant’s monthly contacts with his 
oldest brother and his eight visits to his family in the past 25 years also raise a security 
concern. Finally, Taiwan is a known collector of U.S. economic and industrial 
intelligence for its own economic development.  AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by 
this evidence.   
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Four conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and, 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
Applicant does not discuss his business and work with his relatives on Taiwan.  
As an officer in his employing company, he knows the necessity of maintaining the 
security of classified and proprietary information.  Applicant’s siblings are not engaged 
in the types of businesses which would seek the knowledge he has, except for his 
second oldest sibling who works for a Taiwanese government research facility.  But that 
relationship is mitigated because he rarely speaks with her or sees her, being only 12 
incidents of contact in 25 years. It is unlikely under the facts presented by Applicant that 
he would be placed in a compromising situation wherein he would have to make a 
choice.   AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has his work and property in the United States.  He made the 
conscious decision for his own purposes in 1983 to come to the United States to earn 
advanced degrees.  He met and married his wife, and his children were born here.  His 
property and business, with its personal and professional relationships, are in the United 
States.  His sense of loyalty to the United States is so great, and any residual feelings 
for Taiwan so miniscule, that it is very evident he would resolve any conflict in favor of 
U.S. interests.  Therefore, AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Applicant’s contact with his siblings other than his oldest one, and with his wife’s 
parents, is casual and infrequent.  His contact with his oldest brother is not of that type.  
AG ¶ 8(c) has limited application. 
 
Applicant has promptly complied with all company and agency requirements 
about his trips to Taiwan.  His company president and security officer testified to that 
fact.  Applicant knows the rules and follows them on these contacts with his family 
members.  AG ¶ 8(e) applies.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
 
 
 
8
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant has spent 26 years 
building his life in the United States.  He raised his family here, owns real estate here, 
and has not expressed any interest in returning permanently to Taiwan as shown by his 
business interests in the United States. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen and has 
worked in a professional capacity for a firm based in the U.S. Both he and his wife were 
educated at U.S. universities. He is an entrepreneurial scientist, who has a share in his 
own company doing research.  Applicant is highly regarded in his scientific community, 
and is not likely to endanger that long-earned status by betraying the United States in 
preference to Taiwan. Applicant came to the United States for economic opportunity, 
and has realized his dream of obtaining advanced scientific degrees and financial 
prosperity.  Whether he could have done that on Taiwan, which is a populous and 
confined island under the guns of the PRC on mainland China, is doubtful. The United 
States offers Applicant more opportunities, which he recognized in 1983 and in the 
years afterward.  Therefore, he has a greater attachment to the United States where he 
lives and works than to Taiwan, where he has only visited periodically in the past 26 
years. He has demonstrated his commitments to science and the United States for 26 
years. In contrast, his ties to Taiwan are minimal at this time. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  I 
conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant  
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
