1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-07292
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Clearance is denied.
On February 25, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On March 19, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations
and requesting an administrative determination. On April 15, 2009, Department Counsel
prepared a File of Relevant Materials (FORM), and DOHA mailed it to Applicant. He
received it on February 30, 2009, along with instructions to file any objections or
2
supplementary information within 30 days. Applicant did not respond, and the case was
assigned to me on June 11, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old single man with two adult children. Three previous
marriages ended in divorce. The last divorce occurred in 1990. Applicant is a veteran of
the U.S. Marine Corps, serving from 1974 through 1986. He was honorably discharged.
While in the Marines, Applicant attended college, earning a Bachelor of Science in
Aviation Management in 1986 (Item 4 at 2). Since 2006, he has worked for a defense
contractor as a logistician. 
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totalling approximately $33,800. SOR
subparagraph 1.a alleges a delinquent account for $18,859. The government’s
supporting evidence is contradictory. The creditor is listed twice on a credit report (See
Item 5 at 33). The first listing indicates the debt is $8,859, and that Applicant is paying it,
“as agreed” (Id.). The second listing indicates it is a charged off debt in the amount
alleged in the SOR. In his Answer, Applicant contends the creditor financed a car that
he purchased, then repossessed it when it became delinquent. The creditor resold the
car, and has been billing him for a deficiency of approximately $9,000, which he has
been paying in $323 monthly increments (Item 1 at 1). I find that SOR subparagraph 1.a
is not delinquent.
SOR subparagraphs 1.b through 1.d are state income tax liens for delinquent
income taxes stemming from 1995 and 1996. They collectively total approximately
$1,200. Applicant contends he made arrangements to pay these delinquencies through
his 2000 tax return. His 2000 state income tax return, which he provided, does not
support this contention.
SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.g through 1.h are miscellaneous bills totaling
approximately $800. Applicant provided insufficient evidence to support his contention
that he has contacted the respective creditors to either satisfy the debts or arrange
payment plans.
SOR subparagraph 1.f is a $12,589 delinquent debt owed to the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (IRS). The IRS filed a lien against Applicant’s property in this amount
in June 2002 (Item 5 at 6). The lien was released in November 2008. It is unclear from
the record why the lien was released.
On December 5, 2008, Applicant retained a company that handles tax
controversies to assist him in resolving this matter (Item 3 at pp. 3-13). Under their
agreement, the company will file tax returns for tax years 2001, 2002, 2004, and 2008,
and file amended returns for 2005 through 2007 (Item 3 at 9). Then, it will perform an
income and expense analysis, and develop a settlement plan (Id.). Applicant has paid
the company an initial start-up fee of $3,000 (Id. at 3).
3
SOR subparagraph 1.i is a debt owed to a fitness center that Applicant joined in
October 2001 (Item 5 at 8). Applicant contests this debt. He stated in his Answer that he
is appealing it because he lost his job shortly after joining the fitness center. His security
clearance application does not reflect any period of unemployment since joining the
fitness center (see generally, Item 4, Section 11).
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his multiple divorces, child support
expenses, and “various years with lean or less than adequate income” (Item 6 at 3).
Also, in 2005, his mother, who was suffering from cancer, and his brother, an epileptic,
moved in with Applicant (Id.). Only his mother was able to assist with household
expenses. 
In August 2008, Applicant organized a budget. He is paying several debts, which
are not listed in the SOR, in a timely fashion, including a car note and a major car repair
bill (Item 6 at 6-28).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 18). Applicant denied SOR subparagraph 1.a, and the
government’s supporting evidence was contradictory. SOR subparagraph 1.a is not
delinquent, and does not generate a security concern. 
The eight remaining SOR debts, totaling approximately $15,000, are delinquent.
Six of these debts are for less than $400 each. These remaining delinquencies trigger
the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s financial problems were exacerbated by multiple divorces and the
financial strain when two sickly relatives moved into his home in 2005. Since then, he
has organized a budget, arranged a payment plan for his most significant debt, (the IRS
delinquency), and has been paying several other unlisted debts in a timely fashion. The
following mitigating conditions apply:
AG ¶ 20(b) - the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and,
AG ¶ 20(d) - the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant failed to present persuasive evidence supporting his contention that he
is satisfying the state tax debts as listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.c through 1.d.
Moreover, he provided insufficient evidence that he is working toward satisfying or
resolving the remaining SOR debts. None of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
5
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in part, by multiple divorces. His
ability to resolve them has been hampered by the additional strain of having to assist in
the support of a disabled brother. His maintenance of a budget, effort at resolving the
IRS tax delinquency, and payment of several debts unlisted in the SOR is indicative of
rehabilitation. 
Although Applicant has retained professional assistance to satisfy the IRS debt,
and paid their initial fee, he has yet to make any payments to the IRS. His contention
that he was either researching or disputing the remaining debts was unsupported by
sufficient evidence. Consequently, despite some presence of rehabilitation, it is too
soon to conclude Applicant’s financial problems no longer pose a security risk.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b - 1.i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
