 
 
 
 
1
                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-04241 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On November 1, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about April 2, 2009, and requested a hearing.  
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 30, 2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing on 
 
 
 
 
2
May 11, 2009. The case was heard on June 11, 2009, as scheduled.  Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called one witness and offered Exhibits (AE) A through M into 
evidence without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until 
June 24, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On 
June 16, 2009, Applicant submitted an exhibit that I marked as AE N and admitted into 
the record without objection by the Government. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on June 29, 2009.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the three allegations contained in Paragraph 1 of the SOR 
under Guideline E. 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old, married and has two children. In February 2000, he 
enlisted in the U. S. Air Force. He was honorably discharged in December 2004 as a 
staff sergeant (E-5). While in the Air Force, he held a Top Secret security clearance and 
had access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) beginning in 2002. 
 
  Prior to leaving the Air Force, Applicant started his own practice as a licensed 
massage therapist in October 2004. In April 2005, he began a full-time position as a 
communications technician with a defense contractor. He continued to practice 
massage therapy until December 2005 when his license lapsed. (GE 1) 
 
 In early 2005, a massage therapist working with Applicant offered him a 
marijuana cigarette. Applicant “took three puffs on the marijuana joint and then gave” it 
back to the other therapist. (Tr. 26) That was the first time he tried marijuana. He 
acknowledged that it was an impulsive act, one that he regretted afterward. (Tr. 42) He 
has not smoked marijuana since that day. (Tr. 41) He admitted that he held a security 
clearance at the time, having been discharged from the Air Force at the end of 
December 2004. (Id.) He told his wife after the incident. (Tr. 42) He was 24 years old at 
the time.1 
 
 In November 1, 2006, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. In response to “Section 24: 
Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, 
whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, 
marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, 
heroin, etc.) amphetamines, depressants,(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc0, hallucinogenic (LSD, PCP, etc), or prescription drugs.” he answered “no.”2 
 
 In response to Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity b. Have 
you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law enforcement 
                                            
1The Government has not alleged security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
2The November 2006 e-QIP was the second security clearance Applicant completed. He 
previously submitted one when he entered the Air Force. (Tr. 33)  
 
 
 
 
3
officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security clearance, or while 
in a position directly or immediately affecting public,” Applicant answered “no.”  
 
When he completed the e-QIP, Applicant knew he had tried marijuana on one 
occasion in early 2005, but interpreted the word “use” in the two questions to imply a 
pattern of illegal abuse. He did not consider his one time experimentation as falling 
within the parameters of the questions. He did not intend to deceive or withhold 
information from the Government. (Tr. 29, 37) In April 2007, Applicant was interviewed 
by a Government investigator. During that interview, the investigator asked him whether 
he had ever “tried” any kind of illegal drug. He answered “yes” and disclosed the early 
2005 incident. (Tr. 29) The Government did not have independent evidence of the 2005 
incident until this disclosure. 
 
 While in the Air Force, Applicant was aware of the Government’s zero tolerance 
policy on drug abuse and its random drug screening practices. (Tr. 33-34) He also knew 
that if he had been in the Air Force at the time he smoked the marijuana cigarette and 
tested positive for illegal substances, he would have been disciplined. (Tr. 35) He 
admitted that he used poor judgment when he accepted the marijuana cigarette. (Tr. 38) 
 
 Applicant no longer associates with the therapist. He has no intention of using 
drugs illegally. He signed a Statement of Intent never to use any illegal substance 
again. (AE I)  He submitted a June 11, 2009 random drug test that documents negative 
results. (AE N) His family and employer are aware of the incident and this proceeding. 
(Tr. 43) 
 
 Applicant’s step-brother testified. He is a business intelligence architect. He has 
held a Top Secret security clearance for two and a half years while in the U.S. Navy. He 
is aware of the facts underlying this proceeding. He does not believe Applicant uses 
controlled substances and has no reservations about Applicant possessing a security 
clearance. (Tr. 18-22) 
 
 Applicant submitted eight letters of recommendation. The operations 
noncommissioned officer (NCO) at the facility where Applicant worked in October 2001 
as an airman wrote that he had no knowledge of any incidents regarding Applicant, 
which “would infringe on my trust in him to have this level of access or to be trusted in 
an environment where he would work alone with sensitive or critical communication 
systems with far-reaching impact to National Defense.” (AE A) A former airman, who 
served with Applicant and maintains a Top Secret/SCI level clearance, is familiar with 
the allegations of the SOR. He wrote, “I have never know him to exercise poor judgment 
in either his personal or professional life, and at no point have I ever thought that this 
individual could be seen as a risk to the US government while serving as a cleared 
employee or contractor.” (AE B) Applicant’s co-worker and mentor for four years stated, 
“Never have I known or suspected [Applicant] of being deceitful in any circumstance or 
capacity.” (AE C) The remaining five letters attest to Applicant’s good character. (AE D, 
E, F, G, H) 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 On April 29 and 30, 2009, Applicant voluntarily underwent a psychological 
assessment for substance abuse. The evaluating psychologist found that “Applicant 
does not meet diagnostic criteria for a substance use disorder . . .  He does not meet 
diagnostic criteria for a personality disorder.” (AE J at 5) The psychologist noted that 
Applicant “admitted to a single episode of usage of cannabis.” (Id.) The psychologist did 
not recommend any form of mental health or substance abuse treatment. (Id.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
 
 
5
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the Personal Conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance in 2005. It alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c that he falsified 
answers to two questions on his e-QIP because he failed to disclose his one-time use.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The Government contended that two conditions may apply in this case:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability. 
 
Applicant’s acknowledgement that he held a security clearance in early 2005 
when he tried marijuana is sufficient to raise a potential disqualification under AG ¶ 
16(c). His illegal one-time use of marijuana is not sufficient to raise security concerns 
under the guideline for drug involvement, but does support a finding of questionable 
judgment under this guideline, given his previous service in the Air Force and 
knowledge of its drug policy.   
Applicant denied that he intentionally omitted information in the e-QIP about the 
marijuana incident.   
 
 
 
 
 
6
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, the 
Government has the burden of proving it.  Proof of an omission, standing alone, does 
not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred.  An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). 
 
Based on the record evidence, which includes Applicant’s four years of Air Force 
service, knowledge of the military’s position on drug abuse, his previous experience with 
the security clearance process, his articulate and intelligent demeanor, and the fact that 
he was 26-years old when he completed the e-QIP, I do not find his explanation for 
failing to disclose the marijuana incident credible, but rather a deliberate concealment 
under AG ¶ 16 (a).  
After the Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the resulting 
security concerns. AG ¶ 17 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
 
 
 
 
7
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
As to the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant tried marijuana in early 
2005 while holding a security clearance, approximately four years ago, and under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur because he no longer works as a massage 
therapist or with the massage therapist who provided the marijuana. He admitted his 
wrongful conduct and the consequences of it and has no intention to use illegal 
substances again. Hence, AG ¶ 17(c) and AG ¶ 17(g) have some application as to the 
disqualification raised under AG ¶ 16(c). Applicant immediately told his wife about the 
incident in 2005, and subsequently told his family and current employer. Those 
disclosures constitute some evidence of positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to duress and warrant a limited application of AG ¶ 17(e).   
 
As to the disqualification raised under AG ¶ 16(a), pertinent to the falsification 
allegations, AG ¶ 17(a) and AG ¶ 17(b) have limited application. When interviewed 
about his e-QIP answers, Applicant voluntarily offered information about his one-time 
experimentation with marijuana and cooperated fully. His honest disclosure 
subsequently served as the basis for this case.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 28-year-old man, who 
honorably served in the U.S. Air Force for four years, during which time he held a 
TS/SCI level security clearance. His former NCO and other servicemen consider him 
 
 
 
 
8
reliable and trustworthy based on their interaction with him while in the Air Force. His 
current mentor of four years finds him to be honest. He voluntarily underwent a 
psychological assessment in April 2009 that concluded he does not meet diagnostic 
criteria for substance abuse or a personality disorder that could raise concerns about 
his current or future reliability or judgment. He eliminated the potential for coercion 
through his disclosures of his marijuana use. As a consequence of this investigation and 
hearing, he is fully aware of his mistakes in smoking marijuana and failing to disclosing 
it, further reducing the likelihood of similar misconduct. I also recognize that his 
voluntarily and candid disclosure of the marijuana incident during an interview, which 
generated this proceeding, warrants consideration under this section.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
