                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09337 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: George P. Kobler, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Position (SF 86) on April 29, 
2008.  After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated January 22, 2008, for Applicant detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F, and for criminal conduct under Guideline J.1 The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 11, 2009, with a detailed 
explanation of her finances which was dated January 29, 2009.  Applicant admitted the 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR was misdated as January 22, 2008.  From a reading of all other documents in the file, the 
actual date of the SOR is January 22, 2009.  There is no prejudice to Applicant from the erroneous date 
on the SOR. 
 
2 
 
 
six allegations under Guideline F, and the one allegation under Guideline J.  She 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on April 6, 2009, and the case was assigned to me the next day.  DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on April 16, 2009, scheduling a hearing on May 12, 2009.  I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  Five documents were admitted as Court exhibits 
and used to establish requests for Administrative Notice of certain facts.  One witness 
testified for the government.  The government offered 33 exhibits, marked government 
exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 33, which were received without objection.  Gov. Ex. 34 
was marked but not moved by the government for admission.  Applicant submitted eight 
exhibits, marked as App. Ex. A-H received without objection.  Applicant and four 
witnesses testified on her behalf.  The record was left open for both Department 
Counsel and Applicant to submit additional documents.  Department Counsel timely 
submitted one document, marked Gov. Ex. 35 and admitted without objection.  
Applicant timely submitted three documents marked App. Ex. I-K admitted without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 19, 2009.  Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all factual allegations in the SOR.  After a thorough review of 
the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 52 years old and has worked as a systems safety engineer for a 
defense contractor for over a year.  She has never been married but has a daughter.  
She is a college graduate with degrees in both chemistry and chemical engineering 
(Gov. Ex. 1, Security clearance application, dated April 29, 2008).   
 
Applicant started working as an engineer for government agencies after receiving 
her degrees.  She worked three years in her first position with the government as a 
general engineer writing statements of work.  She received a security clearance for this 
position.  She accepted a promotion to another government position at a different 
location conducting contract audits that she held for two years with a security clearance.  
She was promoted again to a staff quality assurance engineer position at another 
location where she conducted contract surveillance for the government.  She performed 
this job for two years and held a security clearance.  She was again promoted this time 
to an Industrial Engineer position at a major Department of Defense agency.  She 
authored policy and procedures and participated in development of performance 
improvement criteria for the command's response for the Malcolm Baldridge award.  
She held a security clearance for this position.   
 
Applicant transferred to the command's contract management activity.  She 
worked on the internal operations assessment team and conducted technical visits to 
field activities to ensure the command was meeting the requirements for continuous 
process improvement.  She also audited the performance of government employees to 
ensure that contractor personnel were meeting contract requirements.  She resigned 
 
3 
 
 
this position in November 2001.  She continued to hold a security clearance until she 
resigned (Tr. 53-67).   
 
Applicant was basically unemployed from November 2001 until March 2003.  She 
went to work for a government contractor in March 2003 as a quality assurance 
engineer for products being delivered under contract to the government.  She received 
an interim clearance upon commencing this employment.  She was laid off in 
September 2004 when the contract was completed.  She worked in temporary positions 
until July 2005 when she started working as a quality coordinator for a private company 
not working on any government contracts.  She left that position in October 2005 when 
she started working for an engineering company as a technical lead for quality 
assurance on government contracts.  She again received an interim clearance.  She 
transferred to her present employer in April 2008 as a safety systems engineer and 
submitted her SF 86 for permanent granting of a security clearance (Tr. 67-73).   
 
Applicant's monthly net salary is $4,379.44, with monthly expenses of $1,938.32.  
She makes a scheduled monthly $800 payment on debts alleged in SOR 1.d and 1.e 
bringing her total monthly expenses to $2,738.32.  The monthly remainder in disposable 
or discretionary funds is $1,641.12 (App. Ex. D, Personal Financial Statement, 
undated).  Applicant also provided a letter from her landlord that she has rented an 
apartment since July 2008, she is an excellent tenant, and she pays her rent on time 
(App. Ex. E, Letter, dated May 7, 2009).  Much of Applicant's debt was incurred 
because of her expense defending herself in a criminal trial in 2001/2002. 
 
The SOR alleges, Applicant admits, and credit reports, answers to interrogatories 
and court documents verify that Applicant filed for bankruptcy in August 1988 and her 
debts were discharged in 1989 (SOR 1.a); a judgment was entered against her in 
September 2001 for $2,309.70 (SOR 1.b); a judgment was entered against her from the 
same creditor in the same court in February 2002 for $1,051.72 (SOR 1.c); two charged 
off accounts with a credit union for $20,491 and $9,683 (SOR 1.d and 1.e); and a home 
equity loan in collection for $9,049 (SOR 1.f; Gov. Ex. 2, Response to Interrogatories, 
dated November 21, 2008 with attachments; Gov. Ex. 3, Court Information sheet, 
undated; Gov. Ex. 4, Credit report, dated June 4, 2008; and Gov. Ex. 5, Credit report, 
dated January 7, 2009). 
 
SOR allegation 1.a is for a bankruptcy.  Applicant admits that she filed a 
bankruptcy in August 1988 on the advice of her attorney and her debts were discharged 
shortly thereafter.  She notes that the bankruptcy was over 20 year ago and she has 
worked for the government for over 19 years since then and purchased a home in 1997 
((Tr. 73-74; App. Ex. A, Response to SOR, dated January 29, 2009).   
 
Delinquent debts SOR 1.b and 1.c are judgments in favor of the same retail 
store.  Applicant admits to the debts but notes that she has only one account and one 
credit card with the store.  She has not contacted the store but intends to contact them 
to establish a payment plan for the $1,051 debt which is the one she believes she owes.  
She will contest the other debt (Tr. 74-75).   
 
4 
 
 
Delinquent debts SOR 1.d and 1.e are to the same credit union for a car loan in 
default and for a ready cash loan in default.  She settled the car loan for $6,995.  The 
ready cash loan was settled for $4,000.  Her total debt to the credit union is 
approximately $11,000.  Payments of $400 are being taken from her account each pay 
period to pay the settlement.  The first debit of $400 was on May 8, 2009 (Tr. 75-76; 
App. Ex. J, Bank Letter, date May 15, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.f is for a credit card in collection for $9,049.  Applicant 
settled this account for $5,300 (App. Ex. C(a), Letter, dated February 4, 2009).  The 
account was paid in full on April 24, 2009 (Tr. 76; App. Ex. C(b), Letter, dated May 7, 
2009).   
 
Applicant was a management and engineering technical lead at a major 
Department of Defense contracting command.  She audited government engineers at 
field sites to ensure that they monitored the contractors to insure they were performing 
their functions and meeting contract requirements.  As part of her function, she traveled 
to a field location in August 2000.  The government engineers at the field site were not 
performing their functions well and had requested training from Applicant's command.  
The engineers picked a program for her to monitor with them.  One engineer picked a 
program manufacturing radar electronic systems and examined systems safety 
engineering.  Applicant and the government engineer met with the systems safety 
engineer for the contractor.  Applicant monitored the government engineer's 
surveillance of the program to evaluate his meeting the government monitoring and 
surveillance requirements.  Applicant returned to the field site in December 2000 to 
conduct another training session as scheduled.  On this visit, she and the government 
engineer examined the contractor's integrated logistics support procedures (ILS) for the 
contract.  No ILS deficiencies were noted to the contractor's systems safety engineer.  
Applicant returned to the field site again in January 2001.  Applicant noted she went 
along only to monitor the actions of the government engineers and not to conduct 
surveillance (Tr. 77-8, 123-125).  The sign-in log for the contractor showed that 
Applicant signed in as conducting surveillance (Gov. Ex. 8, Log, August 31, 2000 and 
December 13, 2000). 
 
A Department of Defense criminal investigator testified at the security clearance 
hearing on May 12, 2009, that he received a call from a contracting command attorney 
informing him that she received a call from the government engineer at the field site 
Applicant visited.  The engineer related that he participated in a site visit to a contractor 
with Applicant in December 2000 in which Applicant discussed with the contractor's 
safety systems engineer the lack of contractor's ILS procedures.  The contractor's 
engineer related to him that Applicant took him aside and noted that the contractor 
needed procedures written for the contract and she had a business on the side that 
could help them write the procedures.  The contractor's engineer was concerned there 
could have been a conflict of interest and wanted to advise government representatives 
of Applicant's approach to the contractor (Tr. 28-31). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The criminal investigator testified he interviewed the contractor's and government 
engineers at the field site concerning Applicant's action.  He determined that the 
information provided him by the government attorney was accurate and that Applicant 
provided the contractor's engineer with a business card to contact her if he needed her 
to write procedures for him.  He also learned from the on-site government engineers 
and the contractor's engineer that they did not agree with Applicant that ILS procedures 
need to be written for the contract since the procedures were not required under the 
contract.  He learned that Applicant directed the government engineer she was 
monitoring and training to prepare and issue a Corrective Action Report (CAR) to the 
contractor noting the lack of an ILS.   
 
The criminal investigator contacted Applicant posing as a representative of the 
contractor to take her up on her offer to write ILS procedures.  The criminal investigator 
had the contractor's engineer contact Applicant by both e-mail and telephone requesting 
information from her on her efforts to write ILS procedures.  Applicant returned to the 
engineer several proposals on the hours needed and cost for the effort.  The contractor 
and Applicant agreed on a contract to provide the services (Gov. Ex. 22, Purchase 
Order, dated February 13, 2001).  The criminal investigator also posed as a contractor 
employee and spoke with Applicant and recorded their conversations under court order.  
Applicant and Applicant's partner in the writing endeavor who was also a government 
employee in Applicant's command returned to the field site in February 2001.  They met 
with the criminal investigator posing as a contractor employee, provided the investigator 
with the written ILS procedure, and received payment by check of $12,000 (Tr. 31-46).  
In an e-mail to the criminal investigator who Applicant thought was a contractor 
employee, she told him "About the CAR, have [contractor's engineer] send a message 
to [government engineer] asking him for a copy of the closed CAR.  I should keep as 
low a profile on this as possible" (Gov. Ex. 20, e-mail, dated February 15, 2001, 
Emphasis added) 
 
Applicant was indicted in September 2001 for participating personally and 
substantially as a government employee in a contract in which she had a financial 
interest in violation of 18 United States Code Sections 208 (a) and 2 (Gov. Ex. 6, 
Indictment, dated September 19, 2001).2  Applicant was tried in federal court in 
November 2001 and found not guilty at a jury trial (Gov. Ex. 7, Judgment of Acquittal, 
dated March 8, 2002).  Applicant had to use the funds in her thrift savings account to 
pay her attorney (Tr. 115-116). 
 
Applicant testified at the security clearance hearing on May 12, 2009, that there 
is a difference between writing a plan and writing a procedure.  A plan tells the 
government what the end result of what the hardware will do and how the contractor will 
build the hardware for delivery.  A procedure is an internal document telling the 
contractor employees how to do their job.  Applicant offered to write procedures and not 
plans for the contractor not related to any government contracts.  She made the offer 
because she wanted to get into writing procedures (Tr. 84-89).   
                                                          
2 Administrative notice is taken of the statute (See, Court Exhibit 2). 
 
6 
 
 
 
A CAR was issued to the contractor by the government field engineer on January 
5, 2001 (Gov. Ex. 9, Letter, dated January 5, 2001).  Applicant testified that she does 
not have the authority to issue a CAR nor direct the government engineer at the field 
site, who had the authority to issue the CAR, to issue such a document.  Applicant was 
unaware of the program mentioned in the letter requiring the ILS.  She was not aware of 
the CAR until notified by the contractor's engineer that one had been issued.  Applicant 
also testified that the letter did not constitute a CAR.  Applicant in her visits to the 
contractor never observed a deficiency requiring a CAR.  She did note during her visits, 
and informed the commander, that the government engineers were deficient in 
monitoring, controlling, and surveillance of the contractors.  Based on her evaluation, 
she believed the performance rating of some of the engineers dropped.  She believes 
that the engineers had an issue with her and her evaluation (Tr. 93-102).  The 
contractor in answer to the January 5, 2001 letter, informed the government engineer 
the CAR was not required because they had complied with the contract requirements 
(Gov. Ex. 10, Letter, dated January 18, 2001).   
 
Applicant further testified that the contractor's engineer notified her that the CAR 
had been issued by the field site government engineer.  She was surprised because 
she had not observed any deficiencies during her visits.  The contractor's engineer told 
her that he had not heard back from the government engineer since the CAR was 
issued.  Applicant told him that she would call the government engineer and tell him to 
respond to the contractor's engineer.  He also asked her to draft internal company 
procedures telling company employees how to do their job (Tr. 102-107).  Applicant 
communicated her actions with the engineer by e-mail and agreed on the product and 
delivery (See, Gov. Ex. 11 through 24, e-mails, letters, and receipts).  The product was 
invoiced by Applicant (Gov. Ex. 24, Invoice, dated February 13, 2001), delivered (Gov. 
ex. 25, Receipt, dated February 20, 2001, and paid (Gov. ex. 26, Check, dated 
February 15, 2001).   
 
Applicant immediately after being asked by the contractor's engineer to write 
procedures notified her supervisor of the request for outside employment.  She then 
sent an e-mail to the ethics counselors.  Applicant knew the procedures in place at the 
time for outside employment.  If the request concerned a contract she was involved in, 
she had to recuse herself from the contract.  If the employment was general 
employment by a contractor, she had to notify her supervisor and the ethics counselor 
and receive permission from the supervisor.  She believes she received permission 
because her supervisor notified the next person higher in the chain of command that he 
did not see anything wrong with Applicant's outside employment writing procedures for 
the contractor.  She continually communicated with the ethics counselor by e-mail who 
did not understand what Applicant was trying to do (Tr. 107-115, 117-122).   
 
The government presented memorandum and e-mails concerning outside 
employment exchanged between Applicant, her supervisor, and the ethics counselor.  
Applicant requested approval for outside employment writing documents for the defense 
contractor in an e-mail at 1456 hours on January 30, 2001.  Her supervisor asked the 
 
7 
 
 
command's ethics counselor for advice at 1502 hours, January 30, 2001.  The ethics 
counselor advised that more information was needed about the employment from 
Applicant by e-mail at 1824 hours on February 1, 2001.  The supervisor requested 
Applicant to provide additional information at 0741 hours on February 2, 2001.  
Applicant provided one sentence of additional information to her supervisor at 0843 
hours on February 2, 2001.  The message stated that Applicant would work for a 
company, Group S (Gov. Ex. 30, e-mails, at 2 and 3).  Applicant noted that Group S's 
president has been a friend of hers since 1989.  She was also a government employee 
for the same command as Applicant.  Group S was a government contractor providing 
transportation services.  The President of Group S assisted and worked on providing 
the procedure guides to the contractor.  She accompanied Applicant to deliver the final 
product (Tr. 122- 126).   
 
The ethics counselor, by e-mail at 1120 hours, February 2, 2001, responded that 
the additional information was not sufficient and recommended that Applicant draft a 
memorandum describing exactly what work she would perform for the defense 
contractor.  Appellant's supervisor responded by e-mail at 1149 hours, February 2, 
2001, with additional information about Group S that he had received from Applicant in 
response to his own questions.  He also provided information on the role his office and 
Applicant played in contract supervision.  He further noted "I do not see any conflict of 
interest in [Applicant's] proposed employment.  She has assured me that no 
Government resources will be used to perform her employment."  He also noted that 
she told him the employment would not conflict with her duties to the command (Gov. 
Ex. 30, e-mails at 1). 
 
The ethics counselor was still not satisfied with the information and informed 
Applicant that more information was needed by e-mail at 1040 hours February 16, 2001.  
The ethics counselor wrote "Absent more detailed information from you, I am not in a 
position to make a recommendation one way or another regarding approval."  Applicant 
testified that she interpreted the statement in her supervisor's e-mail that he did not see 
any conflict of interest as the required approval for outside employment (Tr. 118-120).  
Applicant delivered the procedures to the contractor on February 20, 2001. 
 
The Joint Ethics Regulation required Applicant to obtain written approval from an 
"Agency Designee" before engaging in any business activity or compensated outside 
employment with a prohibited source.  Prior to taking final action on such a request the 
Agency Designee is required to consult with the local ethics counselor for advice.  The 
"Agency Designee" is Applicant's supervisor (DoD Directive 5500.7, dated August 30, 
1993) 
 
An Applicant witness who is the government official supervising the team 
Applicant served on as a contractor testified that she provided inspections for safety and 
quality.  He does not believe Applicant is a security risk and feels she is trustworthy and 
ethical.  He has traveled with her and he felt comfortable enough with Applicant's 
abilities to turn certain areas over to her without supervision (Tr. 146-153). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant's co-worker testified she has worked with Applicant for over a year.  
She has no doubt as to Applicant's trustworthiness and ethics.  She does not believe 
she is a security risk. (Tr. 153-157). 
 
Another witness testified that she has known Applicant for over four years and 
worked with her when they both worked for a private business.  Applicant always had a 
good working relationship with co-workers and customers.  The witness socialized with 
Applicant and goes to church with her.  She has never seen any conduct that would 
affect her ability to hold a security clearance.  She is reliable and dependable (Tr. 157-
162). 
 
The president of Applicant's company testified that he tries to keep personal 
contact with his employees.  She has received excellent evaluations and even a 
commendation for her work with the government.  He has served as a facilities security 
officer and has held a security clearance since 1984.  He is aware of security 
requirements.  He has no reason to doubt Applicant's fitness for a security clearance.  
Before hiring Applicant, his company conducted a background investigation and did not 
find any issues.  He is aware of her trial for conflict of interest but does not believe the 
charges affect her ability to have access to classified information.  He finds her 
trustworthy and knows she follows the rules (Tr. 162-173). 
 
Applicant's former co-worker wrote that he has known her as a government 
employee for over 20 years.  He worked closely with her on a number of projects.  He is 
impressed with her integrity, forthrightness, and ability to follow procedures.  He states 
that Applicant without doubt is trustworthy and loyal to her country.  He has no 
hesitation to grant her access to classified information (App. Ex. F, Letter, dated May 8, 
2009).   
 
Appellant's lawyer for her criminal trial notes that the case against her was weak 
and the government witnesses were not good.  He characterized the criminal 
investigation as poor.  He considers Applicant to be a friend and she is honest, 
forthright, and dedicated to her work and country (App. Ex. G, Letter, dated May 11, 
2009).   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
9 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18).  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  The delinquent debts that Applicant admits and are listed in credit reports 
are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations).  Applicant had difficulty meeting her financial obligations 
because of the expense of her criminal trial and the periods of unemployment after the 
trial.   
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances).  Applicant filed bankruptcy over 20 year ago and her debts 
were discharged.  Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving debt.  Since 
the bankruptcy was filed and completed many years ago, it is no longer of security 
concern.  Of the five remaining debts, Applicant has paid one and settled two others 
with the same creditor.  She is paying the settlement according to a plan.  The two 
remaining debts are with the same creditor.  Applicant believes there should only be 
one debt since she has only had one account with the creditor.  She is contacting them 
and making arrangement to pay the remaining debt of about $1,000.  Since there is still 
outstanding delinquent debt even though being paid, the debts are current.  Her debts 
arose because of the loss of employment and the need to use her funds to defend a 
criminal action.  She acted responsibly by paying some of her debts when she became 
financially solvent and contacting her creditors to settle and pay her remaining debts.  
She acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant has the means to pay her delinquent debts.  She paid one debt, is paying two 
other debts by settlement agreement, and has contacted the remaining creditor to 
dispute one of the listed debts and to pay the last one.  She has a plan of attack to 
stabilize her debts and be current with her payments.  Applicant's actions establish that 
she is financially responsible.  She has mitigated security concerns raised by her 
financial situation. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
 
11 
 
 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30).  Appellant was indicted and tried 
in federal court for the criminal offense of conflict of interest.  These facts raise Criminal 
Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple 
lesser offenses), and CD DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted).  The alleged offense is serious.  Even though the charge may have resulted 
in a finding of not guilty, it is still an allegation of criminal conduct that raises a security 
concern.  
 
 The government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the criminal conduct (Directive ¶ E3.1.15).  An 
applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government (See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)).   
 
 Appellant has raised by her testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 
(CC MC) ¶ 32 (a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);  CC MC ¶ 
32 (c) (evidence that the person did not commit the offense); and CC MC ¶ 32(d) (there 
is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement).   
 
 Applicant was acquitted of the offense after an extensive trial and findings by a 
jury.  However, this does not end the inquiry.  Applicant states that her conduct was not 
a conflict of interest.  She denies that she directed a CAR be initiated against the 
contractor and then she offered her services to the contractor to write the procedures 
required by the CAR for them.  She attributes the issue to her informing the field 
engineers' supervisor that their performance was lacking and the lower performance 
rating.  However, it was the contractor's engineer who Applicant spoke to and offered 
her services that was upset about the issue enough to notify the government of a 
potential conflict of interest.  Applicant admitted that she presented her business card to 
the contractor's engineer and told him she was in the business of writing the required 
documents.  Applicant also told the investigator that she should keep a low profile 
indicating that her activities were not proper.  This was criminal activity.  While Applicant 
was found not guilty of a criminal violation by a jury, her actions were sufficient to create 
doubt about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.   
 
 Applicant's actions in obtaining permission to engage in outside activity and 
business are of equal importance.  Applicant had been a government employee for over 
19 years at the time of the incident.  She had been briefed on ethical issues every year.  
She knew the rules and procedures.  Her testimony that the comment by her supervisor 
that he saw no conflict of interest amounted to the required written approval is without 
merit and not credible.  The string of e-mail correspondence between Applicant, her 
 
12 
 
 
supervisor, and the ethics counselor clearly shows that there was concern by the 
supervisor and ethics counselor about the Applicant's requested outside employment. 
Applicant was repeatedly asked to provide more information and she only provided 
limited information.  The ethics counselor told her that she did not have sufficient 
information to properly advise the supervisor.  Applicant went ahead and entered into 
the business arrangement and accepted funds from the contractor for her activities.  
Applicant clearly violated the ethical rules concerning outside employment.  As a long 
term government employee, she knew she did not have permission to engage in the 
activity.  She also knew because of the concern of the ethics counselor, that she 
probably would not gain that permission.  While the supervisor had the decisional 
authority, he would not act unless he had clear approval from the ethics counselor.  
Applicant's action in gong forward with the outside activity without prior written approval 
is a clear indication of Applicant's inability or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. 
 
 The circumstances facing Applicant concerning outside employment were not 
unusual in that she deliberately sought out the business. Her action could recur in that 
she could seek business from others if she wanted.  Her actions cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment.  There is some evidence of successful 
rehabilitation.  Her past supervisors and co-workers, and the president of her company 
establish that she is a good, willing, honest, and forthright employee.  However, this 
does not offset the fact that Applicant used her governmental position to get outside 
work from a government contractor and continued with that work even though she did 
not have prior permission from her supervisor to engage in such activity.  She willingly 
did not comply with the ethical laws and regulations.  This is a clear indication that she 
also would not follow the rules and regulation concerning the safeguarding of classified 
information.  For this reason, she has failed to mitigate security concerns for her 
criminal conduct.   
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative jdge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
 
 
13 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Appellant established a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.  She is not required, as a 
matter of law, to establish that she paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR.  All 
that is required is that she demonstrates a plan to resolve her financial problems and 
take significant action to implement that plan. The entirety of her financial situation and 
her actions can reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which her plan to 
reduce her outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic.  Available, reliable 
information about the person's behavior, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.  There is no requirement that a plan 
provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.  Rather, a reasonable 
plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant established a meaningful 
track record of debt payment by presenting sufficient information to show she is taking 
sufficient, consistent, reasonable, and responsible action to resolve her financial issues.  
She contacted all of the creditors listed on her credit reports, paid some of her debts, 
settled others and making payments according to the settlement, and is trying to resolve 
the last remaining small debt.  Appellant is not financially overextended and she is living 
within her means.   
 
Applicant's criminal activity, even though a finding of not guilty was entered after 
a jury trial, is still a security concern.  She willingly and deliberately sought outside 
employment from a government contractor amounting to a potential conflict of interest 
for a government employee.  She knew the rules and procedures to be granted 
authority to engage in outside employment but she acted without securing the required 
written permission.  These actions show her poor judgment, unreliability, and 
untrustworthiness.  She has not shown an ability and willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. This aspect of her life leads to the conclusion that she can 
display the same characteristics concerning the safeguarding of classified information. 
 
Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations, but has not mitigated security concerns for criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
14 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
