                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09997 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s available information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his drug involvement and alcohol consumption. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On February 3, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  FORM Item 3. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On February 10, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 25, 2009, was provided to him 
by letter dated March 26, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on March 31, 2009. He 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. He failed to submit any materials, comments, or objections in 
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 12, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old hydraulics engineer working for a defense contractor.3 
He graduated from high school and attended college from August 2001 to May 2005. 
He received a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering. As of the 
submission of his e-QIP (January 2008), Applicant was pursuing a Master of Science 
degree in mechanical engineering on a part-time basis.  
 
Applicant has never been married and has no children. His security clearance 
application shows he was employed as a “security assistant” from January 2004 to May 
2004. From September 2004 to May 2007 he worked as a research and teaching 
assistant. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, from June 
2007, to the present. There is no evidence that he has ever been fired from a job or that 
he had to leave a job under unfavorable circumstances.  
 
In his 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that he had been 
involved in three alcohol-related incidents. In April 2007, he was convicted of public 
drunkenness. He was attending a fraternity house party and consumed an unrecalled 
amount of alcohol. He set off some fireworks and the police were called. He ran away 
from the police officers and was arrested, charged with, and convicted of public 
drunkenness. In September 2005, he was convicted of public disturbance. He invited 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 3 (2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this decision, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
 
members of his Frisbee team to a party in his apartment. The neighbors called the 
police because of the noise level. Applicant had consumed three to four shots of hard 
liquor. He claimed he was not intoxicated and that alcohol was not a factor in this 
incident. 
 
In April 2004, Applicant was admitted overnight into a hospital because of his 
over-consumption of alcohol. Applicant was at a fraternity party and consumed 
approximately 25 shots of hard liquor. He passed out in a bathroom and his friends 
could not wake him up. Emergency medical personnel and police officers were called to 
assist. Applicant was hospitalized overnight. He was charged with and convicted of 
underage alcohol consumption. As a result of this incident, he was evaluated by a 
college advisor and placed on probation. He has not participated in any alcohol-related 
counseling or treatment. 
 
Applicant’s first use of alcohol was at age 17. He characterized his alcohol 
consumption during college as significant, and described himself as a heavy drinker. He 
typically drank alcohol twice a week until his senior year in college. Around September 
2004, he drank alcohol three times a week. He knew that his excessive use of alcohol 
was not good for him, and he admitted the possibility that he had an alcohol problem 
during that period. Applicant drove his car while under the influence of alcohol two or 
three times. 
 
In his February 2008 statement to a government investigator, Applicant stated 
that, at the time he was consuming two to three mixed drinks per weekend. Once a 
month he would drink to the point of intoxication, consuming 10 to 15 shots of hard 
liquor in a period of three to four hours. Since May 2007, Applicant has been drinking 
alcohol only when going out to dinner or sometimes at home while watching TV. He 
does not believe he has an alcohol problem or alcohol dependency.  
 
In his November 18, 2008, response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated 
that he was currently drinking alcohol weekly, anywhere from 2 to 15 ounces, 
depending on the occasion. He drank wine on a monthly basis, about one to three 
glasses per occasion. He typically would drink to intoxication about every other 
weekend. The last time he was intoxicated was three days before answering the 
interrogatories, while attending a friend’s wedding. He intends to continue consuming 
alcoholic beverages. He has not received any alcohol counseling. 
 
Applicant also stated that his change of lifestyle - from a student to having a full-
time job and moving to another city - has significantly reduced his alcohol consumption. 
He stated his “alcohol consumption has been reduced from becoming intoxicated two to 
three nights a week, to three to five nights a month” (Item 5). 
 
In his 2008 security clearance application, Applicant also disclosed that he used 
marijuana illegally from August 2001 to April 2007. He illegally used marijuana 
approximately 10 to 12 times during this period. In his statement to a government 
 
4 
 
 
investigator (Item 4) and in his answer to the SOR, Applicant clarified that his use of 
marijuana started in the spring of 2003. His last use of marijuana was in February 2008.  
 
The first time Applicant used marijuana was out of curiosity. All of the other times 
he used marijuana, he was under the influence of alcohol. While in college, he used 
marijuana with his fraternity and Frisbee team friends. He still associates with some of 
the same college friends with whom he used marijuana. Since April 2007, Applicant has 
used marijuana once. In February 2008, he was visiting friends still at college and 
illegally used marijuana at a party. He claimed this was a unique incident, and before he 
became aware that having a security clearance prohibits the use of illegal substances. 
He used marijuana after he submitted his security clearance application. 
 
Applicant claimed he never purchased marijuana and never possessed any drug 
related paraphernalia. Applicant stopped using marijuana because he never had a drive 
to use it. He does not intend to use illegal drugs again in the future. He offered to sign a 
statement of intent to never use illegal drugs again if that would improve his eligibility to 
receive a security clearance. He did not submit the statement of intent.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5  “The administrative judge considers the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a): “any drug abuse;”6 and AG ¶ 25(c): “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.”  
 
Appellant admitted he illegally used and possessed marijuana with varying 
frequency between 2003 and February 2008. His behavior triggers the applicability of 
AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c).7 The other disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not 
applicable.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
6  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
7  AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
7 
 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
Having considered all the mitigating conditions I find that none is fully raised by 
the record evidence. Applicant’s illegal use of drugs is recent. His last possession and 
use of illegal drugs was in February 2008, after he submitted his security clearance 
application. Applicant knew, or should have known, that the use of marijuana is illegal. 
He was confronted with his past use of marijuana when he completed his e-QIP. 
Notwithstanding, he chose to continue his use of marijuana when he visited his college 
friends in February 2008. Applicant’s actions do not demonstrate a clear intent to refrain 
from any involvement with illegal drugs, a disassociation from drug-using friends, or an 
appropriate period of abstinence. I find the drug involvement concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The government established its case under Guideline G by showing that from 
2000 until at least November 2008, Applicant established a history of excessive 
consumption of alcohol, at times to the point of intoxication. He was involved in three 
alcohol-related incidents in 2004, 2005, and 2007. Additionally, he drove while under 
the influence of alcohol in at least three occasions. Applicant’s excessive alcohol 
consumption resulted in his exercising questionable judgment. Guideline G disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence,” and AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the 
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has been involved in any alcohol-related 
misconduct since April 2007. However, available evidence shows Applicant has 
continued consuming alcohol and he intends to do so in the future. There is no evidence 
Applicant has received any alcohol counseling or treatment or that he has made any 
lifestyle changes to avoid future alcohol-related problems. 
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence is not 
sufficient to fully raise the applicability of any of the mitigating conditions, or to show it is 
unlikely his questionable behavior will recur. I specifically considered that Applicant’s 
last alcohol-related misconduct was in 2007. Notwithstanding, because of his current 
pattern of alcohol consumption and his continued association with his illegal drug and 
alcohol using friends, I cannot find that his behavior was infrequent or that it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant continues to 
exercise questionable judgment. His behavior raise questions about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 26 years old. 
Apparently, he did well while in college and is pursuing an advanced degree. Some of 
his questionable behavior occurred while he was attending college. He receives credit 
for his two years working for a government contractor. He also receives favorable credit 
for disclosing his questionable behavior in his security clearance application. These 
factors show some responsibility and mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. The sparse record evidence fails to convince me 
of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption and drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
