  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-03491 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 18 past due or placed for collection accounts totaling 
approximately $21,000. The accounts have been paid or are part of a repayment plan 
started in 2007. Applicant has mitigated the government’s security concerns under 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 8, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
 In Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR, she requested a hearing. On March 
10, 2009, I was assigned the case. On March 26, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on April 23, 2009. At the hearing, the government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through K, which were admitted into 
evidence.  
 
I kept the record open to allow Applicant additional time to submit matters on her 
behalf. On April 24, 2009, additional documents were received and admitted into 
evidence as Ex. L, without objections. On May 1, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the $95 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.p. 
She admitted the remaining 17 debts with explanations. She also provided additional 
information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old security officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since December 2002.  
 
In 2000, Applicant was divorced. Prior to that, she and her husband met their 
financial obligations. She had a job as a prison guard for six years and her husband had 
a job selling tires before working for a supermarket chain. In March 2006, she 
remarried. Her current husband recently started a job as a contractor following five 
months of unemployment. (Tr. 28) Applicant makes $10.56 per hour and her husband 
makes $15 per hour. Applicant drives a 1983 Chevrolet pickup and her husband drives 
a 1997 Chevrolet pickup. (Tr. 42, 48) 
 
 In the past, Applicant’s contact with her creditors to address past due accounts 
met with little success. Her creditors refused to accept the small payments she was able 
to pay and routinely wanted her to pay half the balanced owed. In 2007, Applicant 
sought financial counseling. She initially considered filing bankruptcy, but established a 
repayment plan. (Ex. G) The plan requires her to make $216 payments twice a month. 
(Tr. 25) The funds come directly from her checking accounts. Since starting the 
program, she has never been late on a payment. The original balance due on the 
accounts listed in the repayment agreement was $13,718. As of April 2009, she had 
made payments of $6,338. 
 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
  In October 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In response to question 28, which asked about her 
financial delinquencies, she listed a loan and taxes as being delinquent. Her taxes have 
since been brought current and are not of concern in the SOR. She answered “no” 
when asked if she had ever been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt or was 
currently 90 days delinquent on any obligation. At the time Applicant completed her 
questionnaire, she knew she had debts, but did not know how many days she was 
delinquent. (Tr. 46) It was not until she obtained her credit report that she became 
aware of exactly how delinquent she was. She was current on all her obligations until 
her divorce in 2000 and had been making payments on her accounts since the fall of 
2007 pursuant to her repayment agreement.  
 
 A summary of the SOR debts follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
a Collection agency 
collecting on a credit card 
account. 
$3,137 This is part of the repayment agreement. 
(Tr. 29, Ex. G) 
b Collection agency 
collecting for a jewelry 
store. 
$716 
 
This is part of the repayment agreement. 
(Tr. 30, Ex. G) 
c Collection agency 
collecting on a credit card 
account. 
$3,562 
 
This is part of the repayment agreement. 
(Tr. 30, Ex. G) 
d Collection agency 
collecting on a bank credit 
card account. 
$926 This is part of the repayment agreement. 
(Tr. 31, Ex. G) 
e Cell phone account. $153 Paid. (Ex B) 
f Collection agency 
collecting on a car loan. 
$3,375 Applicant’s November 2007 credit 
bureau report (CBR) lists this debt as 
paid as agreed. (Tr.32, Ex. 2) The car 
was paid off in 2004. (Ex. M) 
g Law office collecting a 
debt.  
 
$758 Debt is being paid. Orginal obligation 
was $1,328. Current balance is $408. 
(Tr. 35, Ex. H) Applicant started payment 
on this debt in 2007. 
h Payday advance loan.  
 
$540  Debt is being paid. Current balance is 
$360. (Ex. K) 
i Loan. 
 
$608 Debt is being paid. Current balance is 
$193. (Ex. A) 
j Medical bill.  
 
$283 Debt is being paid. Applicant began 
paying on this debt in October 2007. (Tr. 
37, Ex. F-1) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
k Collection agency 
collecting on a 
department store 
account. 
$474 This is part of the repayment 
agreement. (Tr. 37, Ex. G) 
l Collection agency 
collecting on a 
department store 
account. 
$711 
 
This is part of the repayment 
agreement. (Tr. 38, Ex. G) 
m The original loan 
company suffered a fire 
and moved to a new city. 
(Tr. 39) 
$103 
 
Applicant has been unable to locate the 
creditor. The location given on one of 
her CBRs was a storage shed. (Tr. 38)  
n This is the same credit 
card debt listed in SOR ¶ 
1.a. 
$2,066  
o Gasoline credit card.  $553 
 
This is part of the repayment 
agreement. (Tr. 39, Ex. G) 
p Cable TV debt.  
 
$95  
 
Paid. (Tr. 39, Ex. C) 
q Credit card for tires. $647 
 
This is part of the repayment 
agreement. (Tr. 40, Ex. G) 
r This is the same debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.c 
$2,396 
 
 
 Total debt  $21,103  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
6 
 
 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports the conclusion that Applicant has a history of 
financial problems. Applicant had 18 accounts placed for collection, charged-off, or were 
delinquent, totaling approximately $21,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant has paid three of the debts, two additional debts are duplicates, and 
she has been repaying 12 debts in a structured repayment agreement since the fall of 
2007. Applicant is unable to locate the one remaining creditor (SOR ¶ 1.m, $103). She 
entered into the repayment agreement in 2007 months before receiving the 2008 SOR. 
She has never missed, or been late on, any of her payments to the repayment plan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c) and 20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(a) only partially applies 
because the accounts are numerous and the majority still being repaid. However, 
Applicant has paid a number of the debts and been making payments in accord with the 
repayment agreement since the fall of 2007. Her action to repay her debts makes it 
unlikely additional delinquent debts would occur. 
 
Applicant had no financial problems until her divorce in 2000, which is an event 
beyond her control. Her actions to repay the accounts show she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has paid three of the 18 debts (two of which are 
duplicate debts) and has an agreement paying the $216 twice a month on 12 additional 
debts. She has reduced her debt from almost $14,000 to approximately $7,700. She is 
living within her means and paying her debts.  
 
The sole remaining $103 debt, for which she has been unsuccessful in locating 
the creditor, does not raise concerns about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The Government has shown Applicant's answers to questions 28.a and 28.b on 
her e-QIP were incorrect, but this does not prove Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose information about her finances. Applicant did list some adverse financial 
information in response to the questions. The Applicant denied any intentional 
falsification. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any 
written document or oral statement to the Government, when applying for a security 
clearance, is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A 
falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and 
willfully.  
 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP, she was aware she had debts; however, 
she was unaware of the number and extent of her delinquent debts. It was not until she 
obtained a copy of her credit report that she learned the extent of her delinquent 
accounts. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to her testimony, I find 
her answers were not deliberate omissions, concealments, or falsifications.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts in the SOR were not 
incurred on luxuries. The debts incurred were not the type that indicates poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Money was 
not spent frivolously. Applicant drives a 1983 pickup and her husband drives a 1997 
pickup. She is not living beyond her financial means.  
 
Since 2007, she has actively addressed her debts. All but one of the debts have 
been paid or are being paid. The sole remaining debt ($103) is so small that it is not of 
security significance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.r:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
