                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-06348 
SSN: ------------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
July 29, 2009 
 
______________ 
 
DECISION 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(eQIP), on November 30, 2007 (Item 6). On October 21, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline F concerning the Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
Applicant submitted Answers to the SOR on December 12, 2008, and February 4, 
2009, and requested a decision without a hearing before. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case (FORM) to the Applicant on March 2, 2009. The Applicant 
received the FORM on March 12, 2009, and was given 30 days to submit any additional 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
information. No additional information was received from the Applicant and I received the 
case assignment on May 15, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The Applicant is 60 and single. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks to 
obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The Applicant admits all of the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are hereby 
deemed findings of fact. 
 
1.a. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to his state tax authority in the 
amount of $1,689.00 for a tax lien filed in January 2008. 
 
1.b. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) in the amount of $1,718.00 for a tax lien filed in August 1996. 
 
1.c. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to the IRS in the amount of 
$19,548.00 for a tax lien filed in January 1996. 
 
1.d.   The Applicant admits that he is indebted to the IRS in the amount of $500.00 
for a tax lien filed in December 1995. 
 
1.e. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to his state tax authority in the 
amount of $6,872.00 for a tax lien filed in August 1993. 
 
1.f. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to the IRS in the amount of 
$21,107.00 for a tax lien filed in May 1993. 
 
There is no evidence that these liens have been released or that any of these 
amounts have been paid. In his Answer of February 4, 2009, at page 3, the Applicant 
states, “Process has been established to begin with a payment plan for both parties Federal 
taxes and state taxes.”  The Applicant states in his Financial Interrogatory that 
approximately $175.00 per month would be paid towards this debt. (Item 7 at 2.) 
 
1.g. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to a collection agency for a medical 
bill in the amount of $422.00.   
 
1.h. The Applicant admits that he is indebted to the same collection agency for a 
second medical bill in the amount of $279.00.   
 
 
 
3 
 
The Applicant states in his Answer of February 4, 2009, that he has made 
arrangements with the collection agency to begin payments on these debts.  He states that 
$40.00 a month will be automatically withdrawn from his checking account beginning in 
February 2009. (Item 7 at 4.) 
 
1.i. The Applicant admits that he owed a collection agency for an account in the 
amount of $152.00. In his Answer of February 4, 2009, the Applicant states that this debt 
was paid on December 15, 2008. (Item 7 at 5.)  
 
1.j. The Applicant admits that he owed a collection agency for an account in the 
amount of $539.00. In his Answer of February 4, 2009, the Applicant states that this debt 
was paid on August 15, 2008. (Item 7 at 6.) 
 
1.k. The Applicant admits owing a medical bill in the amount of $132.00. However, 
in both of his Answers, the Applicant states that he has been unable to obtain any 
information from the creditor about the account, including whether it is his and the amount 
owed. (Item 4 at 4, Item 5 at 7.) Accordingly, this subparagraph is found for the Applicant.  
 
 
Policies 
 
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the Administrative Judge must consider the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The 
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the 
Administrative Judge may also rely on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of 
the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out 
in AG ¶18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended  is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG 
¶19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly 
under AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise security 
concerns. The Applicant has over $52,000.00 in past due debts, including a large Federal 
tax debt, which have been due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶20(a), the disqualifying condition may 
 
 
5 
 
be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The most recent tax lien 
was filed in January 2008, in the very recent past.  In addition, the Applicant submitted no 
information which explains how he got into this financial situation or how he proposes to get 
out of it.  This mitigating condition is not applicable to this case.    
 
The Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to pay off some of his creditors.  
Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(d) is arguably applicable.  However, given the fact that he is over 
$50,000.00 in debt and has paid less than $1,000.00, I cannot find that “there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” as required by AG ¶ 
20(c). 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole 
person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  The Applicant obviously has made poor 
decisions concerning his debts.  It appears that he has just now begun to resolve his debt 
situation. 
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all the Applicant’s debts are paid - it is 
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance.  Given the Applicant’s complete failure to begin to resolve these debts until just 
recently, I cannot find that there have been permanent behavioral changes under AG 
¶2(a)(6).  Accordingly, at the present time, I cannot find that there is little to no potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶2(a)(8)); or that the likelihood of recurrence 
is close to nil (AG ¶2(a)(9)).  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts or both as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude the Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.   
 
 
6 
 
 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the 
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the 
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary 
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST THE APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:  Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.: Against the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:  For the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:  For the Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1k.:  For the Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
