  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 08-08474
SSN: ------------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting
under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings1
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on December
5, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the factual basis for the
action. The issues here fall under Guideline F for financial considerations. 
2
Applicant replied to the SOR on December 22, 2008, and he requested a
hearing. On February 6, 2009, the case was assigned to another judge who scheduled
the hearing for March 23, 2009. The hearing was cancelled, and the case was
reassigned to me on May 1, 2009. The hearing took place on June 3, 2009. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on June 11, 2009. For the reasons discussed below, this
case is decided against Applicant.
Findings of Fact
Applicant replied to the SOR by admitting one of the four delinquent debts
ranging in amounts from $85 to $19,880 for a total of about $28,991. Based on the
record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has a bachelor’s
degree in secondary education, and he has worked as an instructor for a defense
contractor since February 2008. He has been continuously employed since at least April
2001. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance for the first time. 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he attributes to a divorce (Tr.
at 37). All four debts, as alleged in the SOR, are established by two credit reports
(Exhibits 3 and 4). The status of the debts is summarized in the following table.
Debts Status
SOR ¶ 1.a–$8,306 deficiency balance
stemming from an auto repossession.
Applicant admits the debt, estimates the
current balance at $9,375, and he has
taken no action on the debt since the
repossession in 2007. His plan is to
address it when he settles his other
financial matters (Tr. at 48).
SOR ¶ 1.b–$720 collection account. Paid (Exhibit B).
SOR ¶ 1.c–$19,880 charged-off account
stemming from an auto repossession.
Applicant disputes this debt. He
maintains  it is from an auto loan
obtained by his then wife in June 2005,
which ended in repossession in 2006. He
denies signing the loan paperwork.
Correspondence from the bank is
addressed to his wife (Exhibit 2). A March
2008 credit report shows it was a joint
installment account (Exhibit 4 at 15).
SOR ¶ 1.d–$85 collection account. Paid (Exhibit B). 
Applicant married in March 2005, the couple separated after about six months,
and they were only recently divorced in February 2009. His wife was about three
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 2
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 3
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 484 U.S. at 531.5
3
months pregnant with their son when they separated. His ex-wife has custody of the
child, and Applicant is paying court-ordered child support at the rate of $656 monthly.
Also, the divorce degree ordered that “[e]ach party shall pay all debts in his or her name
and shall further pay any and all debts in his or her name after the service of process in
this matter dated December 28, 2005" (Exhibit A). 
Applicant has a ten-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. He recently
obtained custody of her after a custody dispute. 
Applicant estimates the divorce and custody cases have cost him from $10,000
to $20,000. He is continuing to pay attorney’s fees with a balance due of about $2,300. 
His current annual salary is about $65,000. He reports a positive cash flow of
$600 to $800 monthly (Tr. at 46). He participates in his company’s 401(k) plan. Since
the divorce is now resolved, his finances have improved to the point where he is now
living comfortably.
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a security clearance
decision is to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted a security
clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An unfavorable2
decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any existing security clearance; and (3)
prevents access to classified information at any level.  3
It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.  And as4
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,5
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).6
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 10
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).11
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.12
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating13
conditions). 
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An7
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate8
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme9
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.10
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met12
the strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security
clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically13
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 14
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 15
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 16
5
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be14
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises security concerns because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting15
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence shows16
Applicant incurred delinquent debts based in part on repossession of at least one auto,
which shows a high degree of financial irresponsibility. These facts and circumstances
are more than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.  
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 1–2. 17
6
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and three deserve
discussion. First, MC 2 applies because Applicant’s financial difficulties were due, in
part, to expenses associated with the separation and divorce as well as the custody
case involving his ten-year-old daughter. He acted responsibly under the circumstances
by putting family first. 
Second, MC 4 applies, in part, because Applicant made a good-faith effort by
paying off two collection accounts. Such actions demonstrate good faith.  
Third, MC 5 applies, in part, because Applicant may have a reasonable basis to
dispute the $19,880 charged-off account. Correspondence from the bank was
addressed to his wife, which lends credibility to his claim that this is his wife’s debt that
she is responsible for under the terms of the divorce. He does not receive full credit,
however, because a credit report suggests the debt was based on a joint account, the
relevant paperwork he submitted is dated in 2006 and 2007, and the current status of
the dispute is unknown.  
I also considered this case in light of the whole-person concept, which requires
an administrative judge to evaluate a person’s eligibility by considering the totality of the
person’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed in the Revised Guidelines as follows: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.  17
Applicant is an educated and mature individual who should be able to handle his
financial obligations without the difficulties he has experienced. At this time, his financial
problems are not overwhelming, and he is not in the middle of financial turmoil. He has
a good job and earns a decent salary. These circumstances weigh in his favor.
But Applicant has not displayed sufficient intensity to demonstrate that he is
serious about cleaning up his financial house by resolving the two largest outstanding
debts set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He presented no paperwork on the $8,306
deficiency balance stemming from an auto repossession. That is consistent with his
testimony that he has taken no action on it since the repossession in 2007. And he does
not have a realistic plan in place to address this debt in the near future. His paperwork
on the $19,880 charged-off account, which he disputes, is dated and does not report the
current status. Since the dispute commenced in 2006 or 2007, it is reasonable to expect
to see some evidence of progress. For these two debts, taken together, it appears to be
a case of out-of-sight and out-of-mind. This suggests Applicant has a lackadaisical or
7
apathetic attitude, which militates against a favorable decision. On balance, I am not
persuaded that Applicant’s history of financial problems is a thing of the past and will not
be an item of concern in the future. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant did not meet
his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c:  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.d:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
