KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s admission established the government’s case.  The burden shifted to
Applicant to explain or mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial situation. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-01616.a1
DATE: 07/07/2009
DATE: July 7, 2009
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-01616
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Applicant objects to the fact that the credit report offered into evidence by the government was dated1
September 2008 and contained information which was outdated by the date of the hearing, February 25, 2009.  The
record was held open for Applicant to submit, and he did submit, a more recent credit report.  In his decision, the Judge
referred to the credit report Applicant submitted.  Applicant has not demonstrated error in this regard.   
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 10, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On April 16, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Robert C. Wesley
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On appeal, Applicant raises the following issue: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Specifically, Applicant argues that the government did not meet its
burden of proving that he should not be granted a security clearance; and he contends that the Judge
committed error in not considering the evidence Applicant submitted and in not giving proper weight
to Applicant’s evidence of mitigation.  Finding no error, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  Applicant was divorced from his
first wife in June 2002 and pays child support for a child from that marriage.  He remarried in May
2004.  Applicant was unemployed between April and June 2004 and between September and
December 2006.  The periods of unemployment were partially responsible for Applicant’s financial
difficulties, including a child support arrearage.  Applicant’s financial difficulties were further
exacerbated by his care for an ailing parent.  Applicant’s debts include credit card accounts, medical
bills, the child support arrearage, a number of student loans, and a judgment associated with a car
loan.  When Applicant was given the opportunity to provide documentation of his efforts to address
his outstanding debts, he demonstrated that he had significantly decreased the amount of his child
support arrearage and consolidated his student loans into one account.  However, Applicant did not
provide evidence that he had resolved or disputed his other delinquent debts.
Applicant argues that the government has not met its burden of proving that he should not
be granted a security clearance.  Applicant misstates the burden of proof.  Under the Directive, the
government presents evidence raising security concerns.  Then the burden shifts to Applicant to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the concerns.  The ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable security clearance decision rests with Applicant.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15; and ISCR Case
No. 06-20062 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 15, 2008).   In this case, an SOR was issued showing that Applicant
owed delinquent debts.  In his response to the SOR, Applicant offered explanations of his attempts
to resolve some of the debts.  For six of the debts, he responded that he had done nothing to resolve
them.  In effect, Applicant admitted many of the debts and thus established the government’s case.
The burden then shifted to Applicant to explain or mitigate his financial difficulties.  1
Applicant had testified that he had arranged for his multiple student loans to be consolidated  into one loan and2
that the payment amount had been reduced.  One of the documents Applicant submitted was related to that transaction.
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not consider the whole person.  The Board notes that the Judge’s3
decision explicitly discusses Applicant’s debts in the context of the whole person.  Decision at 6. 
3
Applicant also contends that the Judge did not consider the evidence he submitted and did
not give proper weight to his evidence of mitigation. When the record was held open after the
hearing for Applicant to submit further documentation of his efforts to improve his financial
situation, he submitted a letter regarding his involvement at his child’s school, pay statements
showing deductions pursuant to a court order, information regarding his student loans, and a credit
report.  Applicant believes that the Judge did not consider that documentation.  There is a rebuttable
presumption that the Judge has considered all the evidence in a case unless the record clearly
demonstrates otherwise; and the Judge is not required to mention or discuss every piece of record
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008).  In this case, it is clear
that the Judge did consider the information Applicant submitted.  In the Analysis section of his
decision, the Judge stated that Applicant had taken steps to resolve his child support arrearage and
student loans, and the Judge found in Applicant’s favor as to the arrearage and all but one of the
student loan items in the SOR.   Decision at 5, 6.  The Judge specifically referred to the credit report2
Applicant provided in stating that the fact that some of Applicant’s delinquent debts no longer
appeared on that credit report did not demonstrate resolution of those debts.  Id. at 3.
Applicant argues that he has mitigated any security concerns which might exist under
Guideline F and that the Judge did not give adequate weight to his evidence of mitigation.   The3
application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole-person factors does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Thus, the presence of
some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security
determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence
or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-23384 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2007).     
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against his financial history and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and factors.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence Applicant had presented
in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.   The Board does not
review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate
the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-01105
at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15,  2008).  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for his decision,  “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the
choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
4
(1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
