  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04286 
  ) 
 ) 
 for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant had one unpaid judgment, one past due account, two unpaid tax liens, 
and 14 unpaid accounts placed for collection, which totaled more than $22,000. His past 
due student loan is current, he is paying his tax liens, and has paid 13 accounts placed 
for collection. The judgment and one small additional account remain unpaid. Applicant 
has successfully mitigated financial considerations and personal conduct security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
  Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 29, 2008, detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, based on a history of financial 
problems as evidenced by delinquent debts and Guideline E, personal conduct, for 
falsified material on an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP).  
  
 On November 26, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On April 2, 2009, I was assigned the case. On April 8, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on May 6, 2009. The government offered Exhibits 
(Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and the record 
was kept open to allow him to submit additional matters. On May 12 and May 13, 2009, 
additional documents were received. There being no objection, the material was 
admitted into evidence as Ex. A and Ex. B. On May 18, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the four debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.r. He denied the remaining SOR debts. Applicant’s admissions to 
the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
  Applicant is a 44-year-old electrician who has worked for a defense contractor 
since 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 52) Starting in 1982, 
Applicant served six years on active duty in the U.S. Army. In 1988, Applicant joined the 
D.C. Air National Guard. In 1998, Applicant, then an E-5, was discharged from the Air 
National Guard. (Tr. 51, 104, Answer to SOR) 
 
 Applicant has been married twice. The date of his first marriage does not appear 
in the record. His job as an electrician required him to live for various amounts of time at 
sites in different states away from his home, his wife, and children. In 1998, Applicant 
left Maryland and lived for a year in South Carolina and Georgia before moving to New 
Jersey. In 1999, his wife was diagnosed with cancer. (Tr. 107) In 2001, he returned to 
Maryland because his wife was so sick she was unable to care for their son and 
daughter, ages 9 and 20. (Tr. 41) During his wife’s illness, a number of medical debts 
and co-payments were incurred, which have now been paid. In 2003, his first wife died 
of cancer and in May 2004, he remarried. (Tr. 93, Ex. 1) 
 
Unpaid Taxes 
 
 In 1999, Applicant was working on a project in New Jersey, rented a room there, 
and paid New Jersey state income tax. After living there a year, one job ended and he 
secured another job in the same state for another year. (Tr. 120) Although living, 
working, and paying income tax in New Jersey, Maryland claimed him as a resident and 
 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
taxed him as such. This resulted in a Maryland unpaid tax obligation. He was unaware 
of the tax liens because notices had been sent to his wife, who was living in a different 
state. Applicant asserts he first learned of the existence of the state income tax liens 
when interviewed in 2007 as a result of his clearance application, (Tr. 62)  
 
 Applicant is attempting to straighten out what is owed New Jersey and what is 
owed Maryland. (Tr. 121) He asserted the 2002 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.a, $2,579) was 
incorporated into the 2006 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.r, $4,131) and only one tax lien now exists. 
Since November 2008, he has made $165 monthly payments on the debt. (Tr. 39, 65) 
At the hearing, Applicant stated he would send proof of payments and proof of the 
current balance on his state tax lien. (Tr. 92) No documents were received. 
 
Repossessed Vehicle 
 
  In 1998, when Applicant moved to South Carolina, he left the family vehicle with 
his wife. Later that year, it was repossessed and resold leaving a balance due. 
However, Applicant was unaware of the repossession until years after it occurred (time 
not identified). The creditor demanded the amount due on the vehicle following the sale. 
Applicant asked for proof as to the value of the car brought at sale. Applicant offered to 
settle the debt for $6,000, but the creditor demanded $8,000. (Tr. 101) The offer was 
not accepted. 
 
In January 2003, the creditor filed a court action with notice sent to Applicant’s 
wife’s Maryland address. At the time the notice was served, Applicant was living in New 
Jersey. His wife was sick with cancer and unlikely to pay much attention to the notice. 
(Tr. 107) She died in 2003. In January 2003, the creditor obtained a judgment and lien. 
(Ex. 3, Ex. 5) The exact date as to when Applicant became aware of the judgment is not 
part of the record. In the court action, the creditor claimed the balance owed was 
$5,526. To this amount was added $3,222 interest, $2,187 attorney’s fees and $20 
costs. (Ex. 5)  
 
Applicant asserts he intends to pay the obligation, but does not intend to pay the 
amount claimed. (Tr. 46) Since the matter has been reduced to judgment, Applicant has 
no legal justification for paying less than the amount of the judgment nor does the 
creditor have any reason to compromise on the amount due.  
 
In 2003, Applicant was last contacted by the creditor. (Tr. 102) Applicant disputed 
the auto repossession debt on his credit bureau report (CBR) and it was removed. 
Applicant did not provide no documentation or testimony as to why or how the judgment 
was disputed, the reason it was deleted from his CBR, nor did he identify the date when 
he disputed this debt. The debt does not appear on either his October 2008 CBR (Ex. 8) 
or his March 2009 CBR (Ex. 9). Since he disputed the debt, it no longer appeared on his 
CBR, and he had not been contacted by the creditor since 2003, he did not list it in 
October 2007 when asked about “unpaid” judgments or repossession on his e-QIP. (Tr. 
78, 80, Ex. 1) Question 27.d did not ask about all judgments filed against Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
during the seven years before the e-QIP’s completion, but asked only about “unpaid” 
judgments.  
 
On the same e-QIP, Applicant did not list the repossession in response to 
question 27.b. In response to question 28.a, Applicant indicated he had been more than 
180 days delinquent on his debts, but listed only a single debt. In response to question 
27.c, he did not list his tax liens because he was unaware of their existence when he 
completed the questionnaire. (Tr. 79)  
 
 In April 2008, Applicant was injured in a serious vehicle accident. (Tr. 53) He 
received disability payments for the six months following the accident. He now lives on 
his wife’s income, what his daughter pays to stay in their home, and social security 
($980 monthly) his son receives from the death of his mother, Applicant’s first wife. (Tr. 
54, 86) His wife’s gross salary is $3,900 per month and her take-home pay is $600 per 
week. (Tr. 55, 84) Applicant is current on his rent, $500 monthly car payment, two credit 
card accounts, and utility bills. (Tr. 56, 83, 91) Currently, he is not receiving letters or 
calls from creditors demanding money. (Tr. 113)  
 
 In June 2008, Applicant responded to written interrogatories. (Ex. 2) Applicant’s 
personal financial statement showed net monthly income of $6,731, monthly expenses 
of $2,645, monthly debt payment of $766, and net monthly remainder of $3,320. In June 
2008, Applicant applied for a debt consolidation loan, which was later denied. (Tr. 88, 
Ex. 2)  
 
  Applicant pays $50 monthly on a student loan obligation (SOR ¶ 1.g). (Tr. 45, 
Applicant’s answer to SOR, see letter dated November 12, 2008.) Applicant’s March 
2009 CBR lists the account as “pays as agreed.” (Ex. 9) There was a misunderstanding 
as to when payments were due, which has been corrected. The loan had been past due 
or delinquent, but is current for the most recent four months. Applicant offered to 
provide post-hearing documents showing the current status of this loan. (Tr. 94) No 
supporting documentation about the student loan was received.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling from his sister, a former loan officer, 
who is a training supervisor at a credit union. (Tr. 89, 90)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s debts follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Judgment for state tax lien. (Ex. 4)  $2,579 Paying.  
b Medical provider $296 Paid. (Applicant’s answer to 
SOR.)  
c Medical provider $35 Paid. (Ex. 9, Tr. 29) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
d Telephone service provider. $799 Paid. (Ex. B)  
e Telephone service provider. $399 Paid. (Tr. 30, Ex. 9, Applicant’s 
answer to SOR, see letter dated 
November 12, 2008.)  
f Collection agency debt. Same 
collection firm for the debts listed in 
1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n.  
$213 Paid. (Tr. 30, Ex. 9, Applicant’s 
answer to SOR, letter of 
November 14, 2008.) 
g Student loan was 120 days past due. $250 Paying as agreed.  
h Vehicle was repossessed in 1998. 
(Tr. 46)  
$10,956 Unpaid.  
i Debt. Applicant has attempted to 
locate the holder of his debt. (Tr. 47, 
75) 
$159 Unpaid. Applicant is willing to 
pay this debt.  
j Collection agency debt.  $36 Paid.  
k Collection agency debt.  $219 Paid.  
l Collection agency debt.  $68 Paid.  
m Collection agency debt. $95 Paid. 
n Collection agency debt.  $474 Paid.  
o Telephone provider debt for his 
daughter’s cell phone. 
$382 Paid. (Ex. A) 
p Neurological medical bill. $257 Paid.  
q Collection agency debt. 
 
$1,165 
 
Paid. (Tr. 30-31, Applicant’s 
answer to SOR, see letter dated 
December 10, 2008.)  
r State tax lien. (Ex. 3, Ex. 6)  $4,131 
 
Applicant has one state income 
tax lien, which he is paying.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $22,513  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
 
7 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant had one unpaid judgment, one past due account, two unpaid tax 
liens, and 14 unpaid accounts placed for collection, which totaled more than $22,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
8 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s state income tax problems arose because he was living and working 
in one state and his wife and children were living in another state. He paid income tax to 
the state where he worked, but the other state also claimed taxes were owed to it. Two 
tax liens were entered against Applicant. He currently pays $165 per month on the state 
tax lien and is still pursuing recovery for state taxes paid to the other state. A 
misunderstanding caused the student loan repayment to become 120 days past due. 
The misunderstanding has been corrected and Applicant is current on the obligation as 
shown in his CBR, which lists the debt as pays as agreed. 
 
 Applicant was involved in a serious motor vehicle accident and has been away 
from his job for more than one year. Even with his reduced income he was able to pay 
13 accounts which had been placed for collection. The two remaining obligations have 
not been paid. Applicant has been unsuccessful in locating the current holder of the 
unpaid $159 account (SOR ¶ 1.i). Having paid the majority of his past due obligations, I 
believe he will pay this small debt once he locates the holder of the account.  
 
 The judgment (SOR ¶ 1.i $10,956) remains unpaid. Applicant currently disputes 
the amount owed. However, this matter has been reduced to judgment and Applicant 
can no longer legally dispute the amount owed. Earlier, he offered to settle the matter 
for $6,000, but the creditor demanded $8,000. Applicant acknowledges he owes the 
creditor for the repossession vehicle. Applicant paid the majority of the accounts placed 
for collection; he acknowledges owing this debt, and previously offered $6,000 to settle 
it. For these reasons, it is likely Applicant will pay this debt.  
 
The SOR listed 18 unpaid obligations so the behavior cannot be called infrequent 
under AG ¶ 20(a). However, Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by 
having to maintain two households. His wife and children lived in one location and his 
work took him to various other states. Since he no longer maintains two households, 
this behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) applies in part. 
 
Under AG & 20(b) Applicant experienced additional expenses when his job 
required him to maintain two households due to jobs. His wife contracted cancer. She 
was no longer able to work or care for their children. Plus, additional medical expenses 
were incurred. These are factors beyond Applicant’s control. Since her death in 2003, 
Applicant has acted responsibly. He has addressed all but two of the debts of concern 
listed in the SOR. He is current on his monthly obligations. Creditors are not contacting 
him concerning unpaid obligations. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
 
9 
 
 
AG & 20(c) applies. He has received financial counseling from his sister and 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved, or is under control. He is 
paying his tax lien, student loan obligation, and has paid 13 additional accounts. 
Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
these 16 debts. AG & 20(d) applies to these 16 debts.  
 
The $159 debt is so small as to not raise concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant wants to pay the single, large debt that 
remains. He earlier made an unsuccessful offer to the creditor. Since he has addressed 
the majority of his debts, I find it is likely he will also pay this debt.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government has shown Applicant's answers to questions 27 and 28 on his 
October 2007 e-QIP were incorrect, but this does not prove Applicant deliberately failed 
to disclose information about his finances. He failed to indicate he had tax liens, an 
unpaid judgment, or was currently 90 days delinquent on any debt. He indicated he had 
been more than 180 days delinquent on his debts, but listed only one debt. 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, 
is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification 
must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. 
Applicant denies he intentionally falsified his answers on the e-QIP. 
 
Applicant’s first wife and children lived in one state and Applicant lived in another. 
Notices of the tax liens and judgment were sent to his wife’s address. Applicant, since 
he was not living there, did not receive the notices when they were issued. At the time 
the notices were received by his wife, she was suffering from cancer, and it is unlikely 
she was focused on the family’s finances. It was not until 2007, during his interview in 
connection with the security process that he first learned of the state tax liens, the other 
accounts placed for collection, and learned the judgment had not simply gone away. He 
learned of all these unpaid obligations only after he had completed his e-QIP.  
 
Question 27.d of the e-QIP is limited to “unpaid” judgments. It does not ask 
Applicant to list all judgment he has received during the seven year period occurring 
before the e-QIP, but to list only “unpaid” judgments. Applicant had no contact with the 
creditor following the rejection of his offer on the repossessed vehicle. The creditor was 
 
10 
 
 
not actively seeking payment of this debt. Applicant had disputed this debt on his CBR 
and it no longer appeared on his CBR. These events caused Applicant to incorrectly 
believe the matter was closed and since he believed the matter was ended, he did not 
list it when asked on his e-QIP about repossessions or unpaid judgments.  
 
When Applicant completed his questionnaire, he was unaware of the number and 
extent of his delinquent debts. If he was unaware of the judgment, tax liens, or the 
length of delinquency on his debts, his incorrect answers were not deliberate 
falsifications. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to his testimony, I 
find his answers were not deliberate omissions, concealments, or falsifications. I find for 
him as to the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries, but were for a student loan, medical treatment, taxes, and a 
vehicle which was repossessed.  
 
Applicant is paying on his tax liens and student loan. He paid 13 additional 
accounts. Having paid the majority of the SOR debts even though he has been out of 
work for more than a year, coupled with his statement that he intends to pay the two 
remaining debts, I find he is likely to addresses these two remaining debts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
11 
 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required 
by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1. r:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
