 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-01884 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Criminal Conduct 
and Alcohol Consumption. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on January 16, 2007. On October 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct), and G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 27, 2008. Applicant 
answered the SOR in writing on November 11, 2008, and elected to have his case 
decided at a hearing. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 10, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. On February 11, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On March 12, 2009, DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for April 9, 2009. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 20, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through J, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his behalf. I held the record open 
until April 17, 2009 to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional material. 
Applicant timely submitted AE K and L, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 17, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations alleged. After 
a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old network engineer, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2008. GE 1, Tr. 27, 33. Except for brief periods, he 
has continuously held a security clearance since April 1982 that was initially granted to 
him when he enlisted in the U.S. Air Force, discussed infra. Tr. 30, 37-38. He seeks to 
retain his clearance which is required as a condition of his employment. Tr. 39.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1979. Tr. 35. Following high school, 
he completed vocational school in October 1980 where he studied technical illustration. 
Tr. 35-36. He served in the Air Force from April 1982 to September 1988, and was 
honorably discharged as a staff sergeant (pay grade E-5). Tr. 30, AE F. Applicant has 
taken a number of college courses over the years and estimates he has accumulated 
68 credit hours. Tr. 36-37. 
 
Applicant was married to his first wife from October 1980 to July 1984. That 
marriage ended by divorce. He has been married to his second wife since November 
1986. He has a 21-year-old son from his second marriage, who is independent and lives 
on his own. GE 1, Tr. 27-29. 
 
Applicant has a history of episodic alcohol abuse, marked by an extensive history 
of 13 alcohol-related arrests spanning a 13-year period from August 1992 to January 
2005. This hearing was Applicant’s second DOHA hearing in which alcohol formed the 
basis of security concerns.  
 
His previous hearing was held on September 22, 1994, and eight alcohol-related 
concerns were substantiated. They are: (a) he was found to have consumed alcohol, at 
times to excess and to the point of intoxication and blackout, from approximately 1976 
to at least June 1993; (b) he was arrested in August 1992 and charged with assault 
(domestic violence), having consumed alcohol before his arrest. He was convicted and 
fined approximately $283.00; (c) he was arrested in October 1992 and charged with 
driving under the influence of alcohol and driving with a blood alcohol content level over 
 
3 
 
 
.10 percent. He was convicted and fined approximately $559.00 and ordered to attend 
alcohol counseling; (d) he was arrested in February 1993 and charged with domestic 
violence and criminal damage, having consumed alcohol before his arrest. He was 
convicted and fined approximately $480.00; (e) he was arrested in May 1993 and 
charged with disorderly conduct and unreasonable noise, having consumed alcohol 
before his arrest. He was convicted and fined approximately $100.00; (f) he was 
arrested in June 1993 and charged with disorderly conduct, fighting, and violent or 
seriously disruptive behavior, having consumed alcohol before his arrest. He was 
convicted and imposition of sentence was withheld on the condition he obtained 
treatment; (g) he received counseling at an alcohol treatment center from approximately 
June 1993 to July 1993 for a condition diagnosed as alcoholic; and (h) he received 
inpatient treatment from July 1993 to August 1993 for a condition diagnosed, in part, as 
alcohol dependency.  
 
He stated at his September 1994 hearing, “I’ve had fourteen months of sobriety 
since that treatment, longer than the period of time that it took to get arrested five times. 
I’m never going to touch alcohol again and that’s it.” GE 13, p. 62. Following his hearing, 
the Administrative Judge granted Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
The October 2008 SOR restated the five arrests above; however, with the 
exception of the October 1992 arrest for driving under the influence, the remaining four 
alcohol-related convictions had been vacated pursuant to state law. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.e.) 
 
Since Applicant’s previous 1994 DOHA hearing, he was arrested eight more 
times for alcohol-related incidents. Summarized, they are: (1) he was arrested in 1996 
for driving under the influence. He was convicted and fined, sentenced to 10 days in jail 
with 9 days suspended, his driver’s license was suspended for 90 days, and he was 
ordered to participate in an alcohol screening program; (2) he was arrested in July 1996 
for domestic violence and disorderly conduct; (3) he was arrested in August 1996 for 
domestic violence and assault. The charges were dismissed; (4) he was arrested in 
November 2001 for driving under the influence. He was sentenced to a fine and 
incarceration; (5) he was arrested in June 2003 for driving under the influence. He was 
convicted of extreme DUI – BAC of .15 percent or more. He was sentenced to a fine 
and served 10 days in jail; (6) he was arrested in May 2004 for driving under the 
influence. He was convicted and fined, sentenced to 10 nights in jail, and attended an 
alcohol counseling program; (7) he was arrested in January 2005 for criminal 
damage/deface. The charges were amended to disorderly conduct. He was convicted, 
fined, ordered to attend alcohol awareness class, and placed on one year of probation; 
(8) he was arrested in April 2005 for driving under the influence. He was convicted, 
fined, sentenced to 10 nights in jail, attended alcohol awareness class, and placed on 
one year of probation. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. – 1.m.)  
 
The evidence also established that Applicant consumed alcohol since high 
school, at times to excess, until at least July 2005; that he had consumed alcohol before 
all of his arrests to include those arrests adjudicated at his first DOHA hearing; that his 
drinking had affected his work performance; that he had been diagnosed as alcohol 
 
4 
 
 
dependent by medical professionals; and that following his 1993 alcohol treatment, he 
relapsed and consumed alcohol to excess in 1996 and from 2001 to 2005. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. 
– 2.h.) Response to SOR, GE 1-20. 
 
In seeking to retain his clearance, Applicant stated, “I have found the Holy Grail 
to prevention of alcohol consumption, in my case, and am sharing that in community 
activities in order to provide the possibility to others.” Response to SOR. 
 
Applicant testified he has stopped drinking since July 1, 2005. Tr. 44, 120, 125, 
AE A. He described that day as the day his counselor saw him drinking in a local 
restaurant and gave him a “look” and it was at that point he “had to make a decision.” 
Tr. 110. Applicant testified he has not had anything with alcohol in it since that day with 
the possible exception of Nyquil, adding that it was a struggle for him whether or not to 
take Nyquil because it had alcohol in it. He admitted to taking the Nyquil sometime last 
year. Tr. 111, 131-133. After July 2005, he attended AA meetings on a regular basis, 
but described his current AA attendance as “not very often anymore.” 105-106. He 
added that he maintains a lifestyle that does not include or involve alcohol. Tr. 117-119, 
123-124.  
 
Applicant submitted a DUI – Related Substance Abuse Evaluation from his 
licensed independent substance abuse counselor dated September 16, 2008, who 
described his prognosis as “good.” AE A. He last saw his counselor in an office setting 
in “July or August 2008.” Tr. 122, 126. He does not attend AA meetings anymore and 
believes his current course of conduct is sufficient to stop drinking. Tr. 126-128. The last 
time he attended an AA meeting was in January 2009. Tr. 134. He said, “I don’t trust 
AA. I don’t trust them. I don’t trust the people and stuff because I just don’t, you know, I 
understand the program, I understand getting with God and all of this stuff.” Tr. 135. 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted an undated letter from his counselor, who is 
the same counselor who prepared the September 16, 2008 evaluation. She stated in 
part: 
 
[Applicant]’s history is one of episodic abuse with 4 year intervals of 
sobriety. He began outpatient therapy including individual sessions with 
this therapist after the screening. [Applicant] also completed 16 hours of 
alcohol education, 18 hours of defensive driving instruction and listened to 
the experience of Mothers Against Drunk Drivers (MADD). 
 
[Applicant’s] last drink was on July 1, 2005. He remained in outpatient 
group therapy on his own volition as a self-pay client. He attended AA 
regularly and has a sponsor, [name of sponsor]. 
 
[Applicant] has walked the extra mile in acknowledging his alcohol abuse 
by speaking about his experiences for the DUI Task Force of [name of 
state], as well as engaging in other community service. His continuous 
sobriety is undeniable and his rescreening on 09-16-08 indicated no 
 
5 
 
 
problems at work, in his marriage and family or medically. The client’s 
lifestyle has completely changed since 2005. 
 
No one, to [Applicant’s] knowledge, drank in his family for several 
generations. However, obviously the genetic abnormality existed although 
it was never manifested. He has Native American heritage and research 
has correlated that ethnicity with predisposition for alcoholism. He 
understands that he is alcohol intolerant by heredity.  
 
There is a plethora of evidence that [Applicant] has acknowledged his 
problem and been proactive in his continuous abstinence from alcohol. His 
work has not been impaired ever. He received a commendation as 
“employee of the month” at his workplace, as well as having a record of 
excellent work performance evaluations. His marital relationship has 
improved and his 12 step program has generated heightened spirituality.  
 
[Applicant], in the past, used alcohol as a coping mechanism for stress. 
His negative consequences from alcohol have provided insight into the 
progressive, chronic, even terminal nature of this disease. 
 
There are to my knowledge no mitigating circumstances in [Applicant’s] 
life that would raise a security concern. 
 
I have [been] a licensed behavioral health and addiction therapist for 25 
years. [Name of community] is a small community with few places to hide. 
In my network of contacts, if [Applicant] were to relapse I would soon 
know. 
 
I highly endorse [Applicant] as a reliable person with strong morals and 
values. He has a flawless work ethic and is open and honest about his 
past mistakes. I know he is 100% trustworthy. AE L 
 
Applicant submitted four work-related reference letters. All of the authors of the 
reference letters were positive in their assessment of Applicant and view him as 
trustworthy and reliable. AE B – E. He submitted a certificate reflecting that he was 
qualified to participate as a [state] site steward, that he was employee of the month for 
March 2001, and that he was awarded two company awards in May 2005 and June 
2006. AE G – J.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 articulates the Government’s concern concerning criminal conduct 
stating, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 Two criminal conduct disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) provide:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(b) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
The Government established these two disqualifying conditions through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides for potentially applicable criminal conduct mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32 does not provide a “bright line” rule for determining when a crime is 
“recent.”1 If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 Applicant’s 13 alcohol-related arrests from August 
1992 to April 2005 show a documented inability or unwillingness over time to comply 
with the law. Particularly troubling are his repeated decisions to get behind the wheel 
while under the influence on at least five occasions endangering himself and others, the 
most recent occurring in April 2005. Applicant’s repetitive behavior precludes application 
of AG ¶ 31(a). 
 
Applicant is able to receive partial credit under AG ¶ 32(d) because of his good 
employment record, remorse, and constructive community involvement. However, the 
passage of time does not overcome the recurrent alcohol-related criminal behavior that 
Applicant engaged in for 13 years nor has he sufficiently demonstrated successful 
1See generally, e.g. ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (Although the 
passage of three years since Applicant’s last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel the Judge 
to apply CC MC 1, as a matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why he did not 
apply that mitigating condition.). 
  
2 Id.  
  
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
rehabilitation precluding full application of this mitigating condition. See discussion 
supra under AG ¶ 32(a). 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern concerning alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
 Five alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. Guidelines ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), 22(d) and 22(f) 
provide: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless, of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant’s 13 alcohol-related arrests from 1992 to 2005, admitted periodic 
excessive drinking from high school to at least July 2005, admission that alcohol 
affected his work performance, diagnosis as alcohol dependent by medical 
professionals, and alcohol relapses by drinking to excess in 1996 and from 2001 to 
2005 warrant application of AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), 22(d), and 22(f). The Government 
produced substantial evidence supporting these five disqualifying conditions, and the 
burden shifted to Applicant as it did under criminal conduct, supra, to produce evidence 
and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never 
shifts to the Government.3 
3See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
 Two alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and there is no 
“bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on my evaluation of 
the record evidence as a whole,4 for reasons discussed supra, and Applicant’s having 
been granted a clearance following a DOHA hearing in September 1994 and his return 
to drinking with assurances he would not do so, I am unable to apply AG ¶ 20(a). AG ¶ 
20(b) does not fully apply because Applicant had a relapse and furthermore did not 
provide sufficient corroborating evidence suggesting he has overcome his problem. 
While the evidence from his counselor was helpful, his statement that he has not had a 
drink since July 2005 is insufficient to overcome his history of alcohol abuse and 
alcohol-related problems. I am still left with doubts regarding his commitment to abstain 
from alcohol and that his alcohol consumption problems are “unlikely to recur.”5   
 
Whole Person Concept 
  
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
4See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). 
   
5These two mitigating conditions are discussed further in the whole person analysis portion of this 
decision, infra. 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant has stated that he has not consumed alcohol since July 2005 and 
claims he has found the “Holy Grail” to avoid further alcohol consumption. He submitted 
statements of positive work-related references, and evidence of community involvement 
as a state site steward. He honorably served in the Air Force over six years and has 
worked in the defense industry since his release from active duty in 1988. 
 
However, given Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol abuse and the related 
problems that alcohol consumption has caused him and others leaves me with doubt 
regarding his eligibility to hold a security clearance. Particularly troubling is his prior 
history of having gone through this hearing process in 1994 and serious relapses. 
Assurances from his counselor, while helpful, are insufficient to overcome his history. 
Applicant stated he does not believe in AA and does not attend AA meetings. His last 
appointment with his counselor was in July or August 2008. While he is free to reject 
AA, he does not offer an alternative support system. Given his history, more is required 
than his assurances that he will not drink.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. The evidence 
leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.   
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the 
law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole person factors”6 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not 
eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – m.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a. – 2.h.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
