 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No.  08-06932 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On February 8, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions, Standard Form 86 (SF 86). On October 10, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On November 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 27, 2009, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on March 31, 2009. Applicant received the 
FORM on April 7, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. On May 5, 2009, Applicant submitted exhibits to which 
Department counsel had no objection. On May 15, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to 
another administrative judge and re-assigned it to me on July 7, 2009. After receiving 
the file, I marked Applicant’s exhibits as AE A through G and entered them into the 
record. 
 
 Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
the Paragraph 1 of the SOR. She supplied numerous documents in support of her 
request for a security clearance.   
  
 Applicant is 54 years old and unmarried. She has two grown children. She 
completed more than three years of college. Since September 2007, she has worked as 
a resource analyst for a federal contractor. Before this position, she had worked in 
private industry in the area of accounting for a number of years, earning a good salary. 
(Item 4) 
 
 In January 2006, Applicant and her fiancé relocated from one state to another, in 
order to start an automotive transportation business, purchase a home and get married. 
Subsequently, they invested in an expensive truck and incurred other business 
expenses. Six months after starting the business, her fiancé became seriously ill and 
could not work. In September 2006, she found employment, but was unable to manage 
the medical and household bills on her salary, in addition to the outstanding business 
expenses. In order to pay the bills, she borrowed from her retirement account and put 
the house on the market, hoping for a sale. Despite a $100,000 investment in the 
house, she was unable to obtain a home equity loan because of the outstanding 
business debts. (Item 4 at 16-17) In May 2007, her fiancé died of a brain tumor. Her 
house is still on the market. 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant began a position with her current employer. Initially 
her salary was $54,000; as of September 2008, it rose to $70,000. According to a 
December 2008 budget, her net monthly income is $3,252 and expenses are $1,430. 
She pays about $1,770 in financial obligations, leaving a small remainder. She has 
consulted with a credit consolidation firm to help establish an affordable plan to resolve 
her delinquent debts. (Item 6 at 2)   
  
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR), dated August 18, 2008, the SOR alleged 
six delinquent debts, totaling $59,056, two of which are related to personal 
expenditures, and four of which relate to the operation of failed automotive transport 
business. The status of the debts is as follows:  
 
3 
 
 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $7,836 debt owed to a credit card company. Applicant is 
negotiating a resolution. (AE A)  
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a $6,317 debt owed to the credit card company listed 
above. She is negotiating a resolution. (AE A)  
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $13,751 debt owed to a credit card company. She 
negotiated a resolution and began making monthly payments of $375 at the 
end of February 2009. She anticipates that the debt will be paid by October 
2012. (AE E, F, G)  
 
4. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $20,543 debt owed to a credit card company. She is 
negotiating a resolution of the debt. (AE A)  
 
5. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a $9,603 debt owed on an automobile repossession. She 
has been making monthly payments of $200 since September 2008. The 
account is in good standing. (AE D)  
 
6. SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a $1,006 debt owed to a telephone company. She paid the 
debt in December 2008. (AE A, C) 
 
 In summary, Applicant resolved three of the six debts and is negotiating 
resolutions for the remaining three.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
4 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations are 
set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG & 19 sets forth nine conditions that could raise security concerns, two of 
which are potentially disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Based on a CBR and her admission, Applicant began accumulating a significant 
amount of debt in 2007 that she has been unable to satisfy until late 2008. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets 
forth six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial 
difficulties, three of which may be applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant encountered circumstances that were clearly 
beyond her control and resulted in her incurring a significant amount of debt, viz., the 
death of her fiancé and a failed business endeavor. She unsuccessfully attempted to 
manage the debt by withdrawing monies from her retirement funds and applying for a 
home equity loan. Hence, AG & 20(b) applies. Applicant presented evidence that she 
sought credit counseling and established a repayment plan for two debts, on which she 
has made a couple payments. She paid one debt in December 2008. Hence, she 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay three debts and is trying to resolve the 
remaining three. Her actions are sufficient to trigger the application of AG & 20(c) and 
AG & 20(d).  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 54-year-old woman, 
who encountered a series of devastating personal and economic setbacks in 2007. 
Despite those difficulties, she has taken significant steps to address the resulting 
delinquent debt and manage her finances, demonstrating her reliability and good 
judgment. In addition, she has a job that affords her the financial means to continue 
paying her obligations. Based on her awareness of the effect that future financial 
delinquencies could have on her employment, I do not believe similar problems will 
recur. There is no other adverse information in the record file that raises a security 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                              
   
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
