1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04825
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 21,
2008. On December 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
J and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 23, 2008 and
answered it on the same day. He requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I
received the case assignment on June 2, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
June 11, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 9, 2009. The
government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received into the record
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented Exhibits (AE) A
2
through G, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of
the hearing on July 16, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 23, 2009, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the allegation in ¶ 2.a of the SOR, with
explanations. 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married with
two children. After high school in May 1990, he attended technical school (Tr. 17). He
has worked in the telecommunications field for more than 14 years (AE) B. He has been
employed with his current employer since October 2000.
On January 20, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While
Intoxicated (DWI). He pled guilty on December 14, 2006 (almost one year later). He was
fined approximately $1,500 and he was placed on two years probation. The court also
ordered 100 hours of community service. Applicant attended a party on the evening of
the arrest. He drank alcohol but does not remember the quantity (Tr. 44).
On October 28, 2006, while his 2005 DWI trial was pending, Applicant was
charged with DWI and Open Container of Alcohol (GE) 4. Applicant recalled in detail
that on the evening of the arrest he was drinking at home. He heard via a police
scanner that a car hit a horse on a ranch where he keeps his horse (Tr. 30). He drove to
the ranch to check on his horse. He had an open container of beer in the car when the
police stopped him. He admits that his judgment was poor and that he should have had
someone drive him. He acknowledged that he “probably had too many beers” to drive
(Tr. 31). He believes he may have had six or seven beers. This second case was
dismissed when he pled guilty to the 2005 DWI. 
Applicant attended “life skills classes” as required by the court. He also attended
alcohol education classes after the second arrest for DWI. He did not receive any
alcohol counseling. He successfully completed his probation on December 14, 2008
(AE) E. His Order of Dismissal, dated January 6, 2009, confirms that he paid all fines
and costs.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in February 2008 (GE) 1. In
response to Section 23. Your Police Record, concerning alcohol-related charges, he
responded “yes” and listed a January DWI. He did not disclose the October 2006
charge for DWI. He testified at the hearing that this was his first security clearance
application and he misunderstood the question. He completed his first security
clearance application on line. He testified that this was an honest mistake. He explained
that since he was only convicted of the first DWI (2005) and the second (2006) was
dismissed at the court appearance, he did not feel this incident needed to be reported
(GE) 2. 
3
Applicant acknowledges his past mistakes. He realizes the impact that the two
alcohol-related incidents had on his life. He admits to bad decisions. He believes he has
changed after his second DWI and will make better decisions. When questioned by
Department Counsel, Applicant acknowledged that when he completed his security
clearance application, he thought that due to dismissal of the second DWI case, there
was nothing to report. He realizes that he did not consider the question carefully. He
now understands that “charged” and “convicted” are different terms (Tr. 22).
Applicant drinks in a more moderate manner since the 2006 incident. He
estimates that he drinks to intoxication (six beers) once a month (Tr. 34). He may drink
one or two beers a week. Applicant does not drink and drive (Tr. 48). 
Applicant is a highly skilled field services technician. He is a knowledgeable,
dependable and responsible team member. He completes complex tasks with little or no
direction (AE) C. He is a family man who is involved with his wife and children. Applicant
volunteers in many civic activities. He is organized, efficient and extremely competent
(AE) D.
Applicant’s direct supervisor considers him a proven asset to the company. He is
an integral part of the team. He is reliable, trustworthy and ethical. He works hard and
displays great initiative and enthusiasm. He volunteers with emergency response teams
in times of natural disasters (AE) A. 
Applicant’s performance rating for mid-year 2008 earned him a bonus. He was
rated outstanding or strong in all areas of his evaluation (AE) F. He completed his goals
and received a bonus for his annual evaluation (AE) G.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
5
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
Applicant did not disclose his alcohol-related arrest in 2006 on his security
clearance application. He answered “yes” to the question concerning his police record
with alcohol but only listed the January 2005 DWI. He misunderstood the question and
believed that since the second DWI was dismissed at the time of the first conviction,
there was nothing to report. He was credible in his testimony that he had no intent to
deceive the government. Thus, AG ¶16(a) and 16(b) do not apply. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant has two alcohol-related driving incidents on his record. He was arrested
in January 2005 for a DWI and while the case was pending, he was arrested for another
DWI in October 2006. He acknowledges that he had been drinking too much to drive in
October 2006. Applicant was convicted of the first DWI in December 2006. The second
case was dismissed. Applicant received two years of probation beginning in late 2006.
This is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).  
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
6
Applicant has not had any alcohol-related incidents since 2006. He is sorry for
the incidents and the effect on his family. He has a very good work record. His employer
recommends him. He successfully completed his probation in late 2008.
Applicant has not provided sufficient mitigation under this guideline. The last
alcohol-related incident occurred in October 2006 while Applicant’s 2005 DWI was
pending. He recently completed his probation in late 2008. There have not been any
other instances but under the circumstances it is too soon for mitigation. He continues
to consume alcohol to intoxication. Future alcohol-related offenses are likely to occur.
His continued excessive alcohol consumption casts doubt on his reliability,
trustworthiness and good judgment. Thus, AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) do not apply in this case. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a married man with a
good employment record. He completed his first security clearance application and did
not disclose his 2006 DWI incident. He was credible in his explanation that he
misunderstood and did not believe he needed to list the incident. He recorded his 2005
DWI on the application.
Applicant was stopped for DWI in October 2006 while his first DWI in 2005 was
pending. He admits this DWI was a bad decision. He admits that he had been drinking
too much and should not have driven in October 2006. He just recently completed his
probation. The Court dismissal was adjudged January 6, 2009. He continues to drink to
intoxication once a month. He has received alcohol awareness classes but has not
received any alcohol counseling. I have doubts as to his judgment and reliability at this
time.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
7
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from
criminal conduct. He has mitigated the concern from personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
