                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05844
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 30, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated January 6, 2008.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On October 24, 2008, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
(as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 7, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  The case was originally assigned to another
Administrative Judge on April 16, 2009.  The matter was transferred to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on June 8, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 8, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for June 26, 2009.  At the hearing, the Government offered five
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without
objection. Applicant offered twenty exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A through T,
which were admitted into evidence without objection.  She also testified on her own
behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on July 10, 2009, to allow the
Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted
2
three Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Post-Hearing Exhibits A through C which
were admitted without objection.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
July 7, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR,
her testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 35 years old and has a Bachelor’s
Degree in Business and is half way through her Master’s program.  She is employed by
a defense contractor as a Senior Engineering Project Specialist and is seeking to obtain
a security clearance in connection with her employment.  
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same,
the following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the
SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because she is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant was married in 1997, at the age of twenty-three.  After twelve
years in an ill fated marriage that involved her husband’s inability to hold a job for any
significant length of time, and her efforts to stay in the marriage only for the sake of her
children, she and her husband separated last year.  The Applicant immediately hired an
attorney and got sole physical and legal custody of their three children.  In April 2009,
the Applicant filed for divorce.  (Applicant’s Exhibit R).  Since their separation, the
Applicant has received no financial support of any kind from her husband.  (Tr. p. 43).
Since November 2007, the Applicant been employed in the defense industry.  
The Applicant realized that she and her husband incurred debt during the
marriage, but was shocked to learn the extent of their indebtedness when she received
the SOR.  Most of the credit outlined in the SOR was incurred in her husband’s name,
and she was a co-signer on the accounts.  In addition to the necessities they
purchased, her husband also purchased lavish electronic toys for the children that he
played with.  Her husband had assured her that he was paying the bills, while she was
attending college.  After separating, her soon to be ex-husband handed her a folder
containing numerous letters from collection agencies that the Applicant had not been
aware of.  Since then, she has been working hard to resolve her delinquent debts.  
Although at least half of the debt incurred during the course of her marriage is
her husband’s financial responsibility, the Applicant has tried to pay most of it off on her
own.  Only five of the fourteen debts set forth in the SOR remain owing.  The following
debts have been paid in full.  A debt owed to a bank that has been charged off in the
amount of $943.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B).  A debt owed to a creditor in
the amount of $2,394.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C).  A debt owed to a
3
creditor in the amount of $1,646.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).  A debt
owed to a creditor in the amount of $309.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E).  A
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $1,667.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
F).  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $1,010.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit G).  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $5,824.00 has been paid.
(Applicant’s Exhibit H).  A debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $141.00 has been
paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I).  A debt owed to a medical provider in the amount of
$5,976.00 has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit J).    
The following debts remain outstanding.  A debt owed to a bank in the amount of
$3,888.00 remains outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).  The Applicant explained that
the debt was her husband’s and she had hoped that the divorce decree would make
him responsible to pay it.  However, if it does not, she  intends to pay it.  A debt owed to
a creditor in the amount of $608.00 remains outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibit K).  She
explained that she has had difficulty locating the creditor, but plans on paying the debt
as soon as she knows who to pay.  (Tr. pp. 45 - 46).  A debt owed to a creditor in the
amount of $850.00 remains outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L).  She has also been
unable to locate this creditor.  A debt owed to a bank in the amount of $1,200.00
remains outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibit M).  Applicant plans to pay all of her debts as
soon as possible.    
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s present and past supervisors,
and other business associates, including a business development manager, the field
security officer, and a  program manager attest to her reliability and trustworthiness with
the highest moral character.  She is said to have always been security conscious and
has accessed classified information in an exemplary manner.   (Applicant’s Exhibit S
and Post-Hearing Exhibit A).  
Applicant’s performance review for 2008 and her mid year review for 2009 reflect
that she has met and accomplished each and every one of the expectations of her job
description.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits B and C).    
Applicant used her income tax refund to pay her delinquent debts.  She is current
with all of her monthly expenses and uses whatever is left over at the end of the month
toward her delinquent debts.  She intends to continue paying her delinquent debts until
they are completely resolved.  She understands the responsibilities that come with
holding a security clearance and protecting the national interests at all times.  She
understands that she must always live within her means and pay her bills in a timely
fashion.  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into "Disqualifying
Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors and Mitigating
Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
4
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20(d)  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes
5
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.
6
Under the particular circumstances of this case, I find that the Applicant has
made a good faith effort to resolve her debts.  Her financial problems were caused by
circumstances largely beyond her control, namely her ill fated marriage that involved her
husbands inability to keep a job, and his failure to pay their bills on time.  There is also
evidence of the fact that at times, they were spending beyond their means.  However,
upon being made aware of the extent of her indebtedness, she has made tremendous
progress in resolving her debts.  She has completely paid off nine of the fourteen debts
set forth in the SOR.  She plans to resolve the remaining debts as soon as possible.
She understands the responsibilities that come along with holding a security clearance.
She also understands that holding a DoD security clearance is a privilege and that she
must continue to demonstrate financial responsibility at all times.  She should no longer
have any problems paying her bills on time as she understands the importance of living
within one’s means.  In the event that she has any future financial problems, her
security clearance will immediately be in jeopardy.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that
is sufficient to overcome the Government's case.  
There is evidence of financial rehabilitation at this time.  Under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19(a) inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts, and 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.  However,
20(b)  the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; 20(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control, and 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts also applies.  The Applicant had initiated a good
faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.     
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.g.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: For the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.k.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.l.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.m.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.n.: For the Applicant.
                                   
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
