1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-09954
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant answered and signed his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on
December 21, 2007. On February 20, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
On March 26, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
DOHA received the request and the case was assigned to me on June 3, 2009.
Applicant and Department Counsel agreed to a July 8, 2009, hearing date. On June 11,
2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for that date. The hearing
was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted four exhibits (GE) 1-4,
2
without objection. Applicant introduced seven exhibits (AE) A-G, without objection. He
testified on his own behalf. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 15, 2009. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 26, 2009, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c of the SOR. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d
through ¶ 1.h and ¶ 2.a of the SOR with explanations and denied any intentional
falsification. 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1973, and attended college in 1987. His first marriage ended in divorce in
1993. Applicant has three children from that marriage. He has worked for his current
employer since 2008 but he has worked for other defense contractors on a naval air
station for almost 20 years (Tr. 15). He held an interim clearance in 2002 (Tr. 29).
When Applicant divorced in 1993, the court ordered his ex-wife to be responsible
for various marital debts. Applicant’s wife was awarded the house and the family car.
She did not adhere to the order. Applicant did not know about the various marital debts
assigned to his wife that were delinquent and were reported on his credit report.
Applicant had a medical problem in 2007. He had a blockage in his heart and had
to undergo a medical procedure in the hospital. He paid the medical bills and hospital
bills that were presented to him at the time (Tr. 36). He believed that all the medical bills
had been paid.
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts, including medical accounts. The current
status of Applicant’s delinquent debts is as follows: Applicant paid the $244 medical
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for $488. This medical bill is a result of an emergency
procedure. Applicant’s insurance did not pay the total bill, but Applicant had no
knowledge of that until recently (AE G).
Applicant settled the $6,926 account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for $2,543 in 2009. His
ex-wife used this account. He was not aware that it had not been paid as he did not
receive any notices. Applicant provided documentation of his payment (AE B).
Applicant paid the account in SOR ¶ 1.c in 2009. This was an electric bill for
$168. He provided his bank statement as proof of payment (AE G).
Applicant presented proof that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for $5,356 is a
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The account had been sold to a collection
agency. Applicant researched the account that appeared on his credit report and the
account number is the same (GE 4).
3
Applicant paid the $490 medical account listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. He presented
documentation of three cancelled checks, each in the amount of $163.36. The first
check was paid in 2008 (AE D).
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a duplicate of the debt referenced above in 1.b.
This debt has been paid (AE B).
The account listed in SOR ¶ 1.g is satisfied. Applicant’s wife paid this account
(Tr. 61). This debt is not on Applicant’s current credit report.
The medical account listed in SOR ¶ 1.h is a duplicate bill. This account is paid
as referenced in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
Applicant earns approximately $60,000 a year. He received credit counseling in
2008 (GE 2). He is current with his monthly expenses. He pays for his daughter’s
college expenses. He now pays a monthly fee to monitor his credit reports (Tr. 70).  He
has a budget. His net monthly remainder is approximately $500. He has a savings
account (GE 2). He has no credit cards (Tr. 79). 
Applicant completed his June 2007 security clearance application. In that
application he answered “no” to question 28a concerning financial delinquencies in the
last seven years of over 180 days (GE 1).
In 2009, in his answer to the SOR, Applicant explained that when he completed
the SF 86 in 2007 he did not know of any delinquent accounts. He incorrectly answered
the question to 28a but did not intentionally falsify his application.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on several accounts for a
5
period of time. His credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant did
not realize that he had the delinquent accounts. His ex-wife was ordered to pay various
accounts. She did not do so. He paid his medical bills and thought that all were paid. He
did not realize that the insurance did not cover the full amounts. This mitigating
condition applies in this case. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ I find this a factor for
consideration in this case. As noted above, the divorce that occurred in 1993 impacted
Applicant financially. He did not ignore any bills or live in an extravagant manner. He
has acted responsibly in paying his accounts.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has received financial counseling. He has resolved
the delinquent accounts. His efforts are sufficient to carry his burden in this case. I
conclude these mitigating conditions apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that he did not
believe he owed some accounts. When he researched his credit report and learned that
his wife had not paid certain accounts, although he initially disputed or denied them, he
paid them. I conclude this mitigating condition applies in part.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
6
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, when Applicant completed his 2007 security application, he did not
answer “yes” to question 28a. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he answered the
questions to the best of his ability and did not know about the indebtedness. He
incorrectly answered the question but he did not intentionally falsify his application. 
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the Government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must
consider the record evidence as whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission
occurred. ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in
ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). Thus, AG ¶ 16(a) does not
apply in this case. I find for Applicant on SOR ¶ 2.a.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the Government’s case. Applicant has worked for defense contractors for
approximately 20 years. He is currently working. His 1993 divorce was the cause of the
delinquent accounts. He paid the delinquent accounts and provided documentation. He
7
answered question 28a. concerning financial delinquencies in the last 7 years to the
best of his ability. He did not falsify his SF 86.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
