 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08204
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On February 25, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive
Positions (SF 86) to retain a security clearance required for his job with a defense
contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to
Applicant a set of interrogatories  regarding information in his background. After1
reviewing the results of the background investigation together with his response to the
interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request2
 Applicant has held a security clearance since March 1981.3
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were4
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official revision of the Directive,
they supercede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
for continued  access to classified information. On December 12, 2008, DOHA issued to3
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise security
concerns addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F4
(financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
originally assigned to an administrative judge on March 10, 2009, but was transferred to
me on March 19, 2009. I convened a hearing on April 22, 2009, at which the parties
appeared as scheduled. The government presented four exhibits (Gx. 1 - 4), which were
included in the record without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I left the
record open after the hearing to receive additional relevant information from the
Applicant. Applicant’s post-hearing submission was received on April 30, 2009, and
included in the record without objection as Ax. A. DOHA received the transcript of
hearing (Tr.) on May 7, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $38,653
for 16 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.p). Applicant admitted all of the SOR
allegations. He also claimed he had settled or paid the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.j
and 1.m. In addition to the facts established through Applicant’s admissions, after
reviewing the pleadings, the transcript, and exhibits, I have made the following findings
of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 47-year-old technical representative for a defense contractor
providing support services for helicopters used by the U.S. military. He served in the
U.S. Navy as an aviation electrician’s mate from 1981 until 1992. After attending college
for about 18 months after his discharge, Applicant was hired by a defense contractor in
October 1993. He has been steadily employed doing the same work since then, but he
has had to change companies and relocate at least four times as the contract has
changed hands since February 2001. (Gx. 1; Tr., 23, 27, 40)
Applicant was married from November 1983 until February 1996, when the
marriage ended in divorce. (Gx. 1) In 1987, he and his ex-wife filed for bankruptcy and
were discharged of about $27,000 in debts. Applicant claimed his debts at that time
stemmed mainly from his ex-wife’s spending habits and her failure to pay their bills
while he was away on duty for the Navy. (Tr. 28 - 30)
The unpaid debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.j arose from medical services and
treatment related to Applicant’s sleep apnea disorder between 2006 and 2008. (Tr. 49 -
50) These debts represent costs and co-payments not covered by his insurance.
Applicant claims he has paid and/or settled these debts. In support of his claim, he
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
3
submitted post-hearing a three-page billing record from the hospital cited in the SOR.
(Ax. A) 
In 2001, Applicant borrowed $25,000 which he used to invest as a silent partner
in a sports bar. He repaid the loan, but the business failed less than three years later.
After the other partners in the business filed for bankruptcy, Applicant was sued by the
bar’s landlord for the balance due on their lease. As a result, Applicant now owes
$33,622 for a civil judgment entered against him in 2004. Aside from a few payments
made through wage garnishment before he moved to his current location in 2005,
Applicant has not made arrangements to pay this debt. He did not notify the creditor or
the court of his new address when he moved. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3; Gx. 4; Tr., 23 - 25, 32 - 36,
46 - 48)
Since 2000, Applicant has owed about $1,900 for two delinquent credit cards
(SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.n). He has also owed over the last nine years, a $228 debt to a credit
union (SOR ¶ 1.k), and $545 to a furniture company (SOR ¶ 1.p). Applicant has taken
no action to pay or otherwise resolve these debts. Applicant also owes $82 for a
delinquent  telephone account (SOR ¶ 1.n). He claims to have paid this debt, but
produced nothing to document his claim. Finally, Applicant owes a $177 debt for a
satellite television account delinquent since 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.o). He has not paid this
account. (Gx. 3 and 4; Tr., 36 - 40)
A personal financial statement (PFS) submitted in response to DOHA
interrogatories in October 2008 shows Applicant has about $1,250 remaining each
month after expenses and loan payments. The PFS did not show that he is paying
anything on the debts listed in the SOR. (Gx. 2; Tr. 41 - 44)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy6
in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole
person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute,
extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who has access7
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based
on trust and confidence. Thus, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring
each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one
who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.p. The facts thus established show that Applicant owes approximately
$38,653 in delinquent debts dating back to at least 2000. The record requires
application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
5
As to SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.j, Ax. A shows a zero balance due on 11 office visits or
procedures between June 2006 and June 2008. Comparison of this document to the
credit reports proffered by the government (Gx. 3 and 4) does not directly corroborate
Applicant’s claim. However, this information shows ongoing medical services and
payments over the time period at issue. SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.j are resolved for Applicant.
Security concerns about Applicant’s financial problems might be resolved by
application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment), AG ¶¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances), AG ¶¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control), or AG ¶¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). 
Applicant benefits from AG ¶¶ 20(d) as he demonstrated that he has paid or
otherwise resolved the medical debts alleged in the SOR. I have also considered
applications of AG ¶¶ 20(b) as the judgment for $32,000 arose from a downturn in
business. However, this mitigating condition does not apply. Applicant has not acted
responsibly in trying to resolve that debt and has failed over several years to resolve the
five debts under $1,000 each despite clearly having the financial means to do so. Such
inaction outweighs the positive information about SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.j. Further, AG ¶¶ 20(c)
does not apply because he has not sought any financial counseling or debt repayment
assistance, and he has not established that his financial problems are under control. In
summary, Applicant has not submitted sufficient information to mitigate the Guideline F
security concerns established by this record. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 47 years old and
presumed to be a mature adult. There is no available information about his reliability or
trustworthiness that would support a prediction that his finances have improved so as to
avoid more financial problems in the future. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all9
available information bearing on Applicant’s finances and truthfulness shows he has
failed to address satisfactorily the government’s doubts about his ability or willingness to
protect the government’s interests as his own. Because protection of the national
interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of
the government.  10
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k - 1.p: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
