1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-07687
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
July 6, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on January 5, 2006.  On December 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guideline B for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 1, 2009.  He answered
the SOR in writing through counsel on January 30, 2009, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on February 5, 2009, and
the case was originally assigned to another Judge on April 27, 2009.  It was reassigned
to the undersigned on May 4, 2009.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 6, 2009,
2
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 27, 2009.  The Government offered
Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through H, without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on June 2, 2009.  The record closed
on May 27, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Syria and Iraq.  The request was granted.  The request, and
the attached documents, were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the
record.  Applicant’s counsel also asked that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to the Middle East and additional facts relating to Iraq.  The request was also
granted.  The requests, and the attached documents, were not admitted into evidence,
but were included in the record.  The facts administratively noticed are set out in the
Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegations styled in the
subparagraphs of the SOR, without explanations.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
The Applicant was born in Bagdad, Iraq, but came to the U.S. in 1987 (TR at
page 25 line 8 to page 27 line 19).  He received an advanced degree from an American
university, became a U.S. citizen, and is now employed by a government contractor in
“support to all our troops and our Government in the effort in Iraq” (Id, and TR at page
51 lines 3~15).  His direct supervisor, an U.S. Army Captain, gives the Applicant tops
marks in all aspects of his job in Iraq (AppXs E~G).  He works in Iraq on four month
cycles, and then spends two weeks of leave with his family (AppXs A, B, and E~G).  His
primary residence is in the U.S., where he lives with his wife and four daughters (TR at
page 46 line 6 to page 48 line 20).  His wife is “an assistant teacher” (Id).  His annual
income is about $200,000, and he has about $130,000 in savings (TR at page 46 line 6
to page 48 line 20).
1.a.~1.c. and 1.f.  The Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in Syria
with one of the Applicant’s sisters (TR at page 31 line 19 to page 32 line 5).  She is 81
years of age, and has “always [been] a housewife;” and as such, she has never worked
for any foreign government (TR at page 55 lines 1~5, and at page 59 line 3~5).  In the
past, he would send his mother about $200 each month (TR at page 31 line 23 to page
32 line 5, see also at page 28 line 20 to page 30 line 11).  The Applicant ceased this
practice “[a]bout seven months ago” (Id).
3
Applicant’s sister is also a citizen of Iraq (TR at page 62 line 18 to page 64 line
14).  She “is a housewife;” and as such, does not work for any foreign government (Id).
Her husband is deceased (TR at page 62 line 18 to page 64 line 14).  Both this sister
and Applicant’s mother have formally applied to immigrate to the U.S. (Id).  Neither his
mother nor his sister know that the Applicant works for the U.S. Government (TR at
page 69 lines 15~20).
1.c.  The Applicant has another sister who is a citizen of Iraq, but now resides in
the United Arab Emirates (TR at page 59 line 21 to page 62 line 17).  “She is a retired
teacher” (Id).  Her husband is also deceased (TR at page 59 line 21 to page 62 line 17).
She has no affiliation with any foreign government (Id).  This sister does not know that
the Applicant works for the U.S. Government (TR at page 59 line 21 to page 62 line 17).
1.d.  The Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Iraq (TR at page
69 line 21 to page 70 line 4).  She is 74 years of age, and “a housewife” (Id).  Her
husband is deceased, and she, through Appellant’s wife, has formally applied to
immigrate to the U.S. (TR at page 71 lines 1~8).
1.e., 1.g. and 1.i.  The Applicant’s brother is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in the
U.S. (TR at page 32 line 17 to page 33 line 11).  He “owns a construction business” in
the U.S. (TR at page 76 line 1 to page 77 line 17).  At one time, this brother lived in
Jordan, and the Applicant visited his brother and other family members in Jordan in
2004, 2005, 2006, and 2008 (TR at page 78 line 6 to page 85 line 10).  The Applicant
once owned property in Iraq, but sold this property to his brother for future consideration
(TR at page 86 line 16 to page 88 line 11).
1.h.  The Applicant had another brother who was a citizen and resident of Iraq,
but he was killed by terrorists in about 2006 (TR at page 28 lines 5~14, and at page 35
lines 5~11).
The Applicant testified that he would not be subject to coercion by any foreign
government vis-a-vis those of his relatives who do not live in the U.S. (TR at page 36
lines 8~13).  Any such attempt at coercion would be reported to “U.S. authorities, and to
. . . [his] company” (Id).
I also take administrative notice of the following facts.  Since 1963, Syria has
been ruled by an authoritarian regime.  It is currently included on the State
Department’s list of states that sponsor terrorism.  Due to Syria’s active and passive
support of terrorism, trade and commercial sanctions were implemented against Syria in
2004, 2006 and in 2008.  In 2007, the State Department noted that its human rights
record had worsened.  Iraq, on the other hand, is a valuable partner with the U.S. in the
war on terrorism, but violence continues to engulf the country.  Furthermore, there
continue to be reports of human rights abuses in Iraq.
4
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
5
Analysis
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Paragraph 6 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Foreign Influence: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign interests, may be manipulated or induced
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S.
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by a foreign interest.”
Here, AG ¶ 7(a) is applicable: “contacts with a foreign family member . . . who is
a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  The Applicant’s
mother and one sibling live in Syria, and his mother in-law lives in Iraq.  This is clearly
countered, however, by the first mitigating condition, as “the nature of the relationships
with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located . . . are such that it
is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual . . . and the interests of the U.S.”  All of the Applicant’s
surviving relatives noted in the SOR have either immigrated to the U.S., or have
formally applied for immigration status.
AG ¶ 7(b) is also arguably applicable: “connections to a foreign person . . . that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person .
. . by providing information.”  This is clearly countered, however, by AG ¶ 8(b), as “there
is no conflict of interest, . . . because . . . the individual has such a deep and
longstanding relationship and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  The Applicant has lived in
the U.S. for more than 20 years.  All of his wealth and possessions are here.
Furthermore, his wife, children, and soon most of his family that are of concern to the
Government, will reside in the U.S.  I have no doubt as to his loyalties to the U.S.
Finally, the fourth mitigating condition is also applicable, as “the foreign . . .
activities are on U.S. Government business . . . .“  He works as a U.S. government
contractor in support of the U.S.’s mission in Iraq.  Furthermore, he can not be coerced
by Syria or Iraq.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
6
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
He has the unqualified support of the U.S. military, as evidenced by letters of
support, and certificates of appreciation (AppXs A~D).  A Deputy Commanding Officer
of an Infantry Brigade stationed in Iraq avers, in part, the following:
[The Applicant] . . . is a man of great dedication and selfless sacrifice to
America’s mission to assist their Iraqi allies.  I fully endorse his request for
a clearance to handle classified material (AppX B).
I have considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns arising from his alleged Foreign Influence. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
