 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04668 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on August 30, 2007 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 1). On September 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on September 28, 2008, answered it in an undated 
document, and requested determination on the record without a hearing (GX 3). DOHA 
received his response on October 14, 2008. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s written case on December 3, 2008. On December 4, 2008, a complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
government’s evidence. Applicant apparently did not receive the FORM, and it was 
resent on May 18, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on May 21, 2009. On June 18, 
2009, he telephonically requested an extension of time to respond, and the deadline 
was extended to July 6, 2009. He submitted additional evidence on June 26, 2009. The 
case was assigned to me on July 7, 2009.  
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 The last four debts alleged in the SOR were mislabeled as 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l. 
They should have been labeled as 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o. Applicant noted the error in his 
answer to the SOR, and Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to 
Applicant’s answer. I granted the motion to amend, and the corrections have been 
handwritten on the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old access control officer employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since April 2006. He previously 
worked for another federal contractor from July 2001 to October 2003 and for a state 
government from August 2000 to June 2001. He was unemployed from February to 
August 2000. He worked for a state government from February 1998 to February 2000 
and for a private company from January 1995 to February 1998. He previously received 
a clearance in September 1997. The record does not reflect whether he currently holds 
a clearance. 
 
Applicant was married in June 1998 and divorced in March 2007. He has a child 
for whom he is obligated to pay child support of $600 per month.  
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $51,476. Five debts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.g-1.j and 1.l) totaling about $33,702 are for student loans. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges 
unpaid state taxes. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.n allege delinquent credit card accounts. 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges an unpaid telephone bill. SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a child support 
arrearage. SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a deficiency after car repossession. SOR ¶ 1.m alleges an 
unpaid judgment obtained by a vacation resort. SOR ¶ 1.o alleges an unspecified 
collection account. All the delinquent debts were incurred after Applicant’s period of 
unemployment ended in August 2000. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided evidence that the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were paid, and that he was making payments on the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.j, 1,l, and 1.n. In his response to the FORM, he provided evidence that 
 3
the child support arrearage in SOR ¶ 1.e had been resolved; the balance on the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.f had been reduced from $3,526 to $1,492; and the balance on the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n had been reduced from $3,379 to $988. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.d, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.o are not resolved. Applicant has not disputed any of the debts. 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories on June 10, 2008, Applicant stated he had 
been making payments to the creditors listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 1.n, but had been 
unable to continue the payments because he had been laid off from his employment 
(GX 7 at 15, 25, and 26). This lay-off apparently was from a second job, because in his 
response to the FORM dated July 26, 2009, he stated he expected to continue making 
his monthly payments but that payments on the student loans were reduced due to loss 
of his second job.  
 
In a personal financial statement (PFS) attached to the DOHA interrogatories of 
June 2008, Applicant reported net monthly income of about $2,326, expenses of 
$2,790, and debt payments totaling $395 on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, and 
1.n (GX 7 at 30). It does not reflect any payments on his student loans. If his information 
is accurate, he has a negative cash flow of $559 per month.  
 
Applicant’s PFS lists real estate worth $400,000. He does not list any mortgage 
payments, but he does list rent of $1,051. His credit report dated April 18, 2008, reflects 
a real estate mortgage with payments of $1,056 and a remaining balance of $125,000 
(GX 7 at 3). The record does not reflect whether this property is Applicant’s residence or 
a residence occupied by someone else such as his ex-wife. The record also does not 
reflect whether Applicant could use the equity in this property to repay his delinquent 
debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 4
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 5
 Four potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised by 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent spending beyond 
one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative 
cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” AG ¶ 19(g) is 
raised by “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same.” 
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(g) is not 
raised by the state tax debt, because there is no evidence that the debt was caused by 
a failure to file a return or by filing a fraudulent return. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established, because Applicant’s debts are recent and numerous, and 
there is no evidence that they were the result of circumstances that are unlikely to recur. 
His divorce arguably qualified as a circumstance that is unlikely to recur, but he has 
provided no evidence of the impact of his divorce on his financial situation, other than 
his obligation to pay child support. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s divorce might qualify as a 
circumstance beyond his control, but he presented no evidence of the financial impact 
of the divorce. He was unemployed from February to August 2000, but he presented no 
evidence showing that this period of unemployment caused his current financial 
problems. All the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR appear to have been incurred 
after he returned to the workforce. His loss of a second job appears to have occurred at 
some time in 2008, long after the debts were already delinquent. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) 
is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because there is no evidence Applicant has 
sought or received debt counseling. 
 6
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). The evidence shows that Applicant paid the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, paid the child support arrearage alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e, and has been making payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1j, 1.l, and 1.n. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established for these debts, but not for the others alleged in the SOR. 
 
 An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of each 
and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 
2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. Id. 
 
 To his credit, Applicant negotiated payment plans with three creditors and made 
periodic payments until he lost his second job. He apparently has been making some 
payments on his student loans, also dependent on his second job. He has no specific 
plan to address the remaining delinquent debts, and he does not appear to have the 
financial means to do so.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. 
 
 My evaluation of Applicant’s sincerity, candor, and credibility is limited because 
this case is being decided without a hearing. Applicant has responded in detail to DOHA 
 7
inquiries, the SOR, and the FORM. Nevertheless, he has provided little information 
about the impact of his employment lay-offs and his divorce on his financial situation. In 
spite of his efforts to resolve some of his debts, the evidence does not show that he is 
likely to achieve financial stability in the foreseeable future. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
