                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-08677 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on January 11, 
2008. On December 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 5, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received his response on January 8, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 10, 2009, and I 
received the case assignment on February 12, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on March 12, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 9, 2009.  The hearing was held as 
scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 11, which were 
received without objection. The Government also offered a List of Government Exhibits, 
(Ex) I. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received 
without objection, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 17, 2009. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to reflect the correct spelling of 
Applicant’s last name. Without objection from the Applicant, I granted Department 
Counsel’s motion. Tr. 8-9. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.b., 1.d. – 1.k., and denied SOR ¶ 1.c. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old custodian1, who has worked for his defense contractor 
employer since February 2008. GE 1, Tr. 14, 19-20. He seeks a security clearance to 
enhance his position within his company. Without a clearance, he is only authorized to 
enter unsecure spaces. If his duties require him to enter a secure space, he is required 
to have an escort. Tr. 20-22. 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1978. He later attended “a couple 
of semesters” at a local community college “two or three years ago.” Tr. 18-19. He was 
previously married from May 1980 to April 1987, and that marriage ended by divorce. 
GE 1, 14-15. Three children were born during that marriage, a 28-year-old daughter, a 
27-year-old daughter, and a 25-year-old son. GE 1, Tr. 16. Applicant has not had any 
contact with his children since his divorce and has “no idea” where his children are. He 
stated, “[m]y ex was so mad with me that she just didn’t let me see them.” Tr. 17. 
 
The SOR alleged 11 separate incidents involving Applicant that required law 
enforcement intervention. These incidents spanned a 22-year period from January 1986 
to February 2008. With the exception of a March 1999 incident, which Applicant denied, 
1 Applicant described his duties as a custodian to consist of vacuuming, cleaning, 
dusting, and emptying the trash. Tr. 20. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
the remaining incidents were established either by Applicant’s admissions and/or 
evidence presented. They are summarized below. 
 
Incident/arrest Result Record Comments 
1. 1/86 – Arrested 
for disorderly 
conduct. 
Convicted & fined 
$69.00. 
Tr. 25-27. SOR ¶ 1.k. - 
Admitted.  
2. 2/90 – Arrested & 
charged with driving 
under the influence 
& hit & run. 
Both charges either 
set aside and/or 
dismissed by city 
atty.  
Tr. 27-35, GE 4. SOR ¶ 1.j. – 
Admitted.  
3. 3/90 – Arrested & 
charged with 
shoplifting & 
criminal trespass.  
Convicted of 
criminal trespass & 
sentenced to 21 
hours community 
service & fined 
$110.75. 
Tr. 35-37, GE 5. SOR ¶ 1.i. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, fines 
not paid & 
community service 
not completed. 
4. 4/91 – Arrested & 
charged with fail to 
yield from private 
road or drive. 
Convicted & fined 
$63.88. 
Tr. 37-38, GE 6. SOR ¶ 1.h. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, fine 
not paid. 
5. 6/91 – Arrested 
for false report to 
law enforcement, no 
license, no 
insurance, & failure 
to appear. 
Convicted of false 
report & failure to 
appear & fined 
$453.24. 
Tr. 38-45, GE 7. SOR ¶ 1. g. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, fine 
not paid. 
6. 1/92 – Cited for 
possession of 
marijuana & drug 
paraphernalia & 
failure to appear. 
Convicted & fined 
$358.00.  
Tr. 45-50, GE 8. SOR ¶ 1.f. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, fine 
not paid. 
7. 1/93 – Arrested 
for possession of 
marijuana. 
Convicted, fined & 
sentenced to 28 
hours community 
service & six 
months 
unsupervised 
probation. 
Tr. 50-53, GE 9. SOR ¶ 1.e. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, 
community service 
not completed. 
8. 10/95 – Arrested 
for 3rd degree 
criminal trespass & 
aggravated criminal 
damage. 
Fined $204.68 & 
sentenced to 25 
hours community 
service. 
Tr. 53-57, GE 10. SOR ¶ 1.d. – 
Admitted. As of 
hearing date, fine 
not paid & 
community service 
not completed. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
9. 3/99 – Arrested 
for sexual battery. 
Released with no 
charges ever filed. 
Tr. 57-64, GE 3. SOR ¶ 1.c. – 
Denied. Explained 
at hearing “was 
falsely accused.” 
10. 4/05 – Cited for 
driving with 
suspended license 
& no evidence of 
financial 
responsibility. 
Convicted of 
suspended license 
& fined. 
Tr. 64-67, GE 11, 
AE A. 
SOR ¶ 1.b. – 
Admitted. Paid fine 
1/06. 
11. 2/08 – Cited for 
public nuisance. 
Charge dismissed 
after completion of 
Adult Responsibility 
Class. 
Tr. 67-71. SOR ¶ 1.a. – 
Admitted. Applicant 
stated he was drunk 
while crossing 
street. 
 
 Applicant adamantly denies any wrongdoing stemming from his October 1999 
arrest for sexual battery (SOR ¶ 1.c.). He explained at the time he was living with his 
girlfriend and her teenage children, a daughter and a son. Tension developed between 
Applicant and his girlfriend’s children, which resulted in his girlfriend’s daughter filing a 
false accusation of sexual battery against him. Shortly after the incident, his girlfriend 
sent him a letter of apology. Applicant has had no communication with his former 
girlfriend since receiving the letter of apology. Tr. 57-64, GE 3. 
 
Regarding his unpaid fines accumulated throughout the years, Applicant testified 
that he is making payments “when [he] can,” that the courts are “working with [him],” he 
estimates he has made “three or four” payments towards his unpaid fines, and 
estimates he owes “[o]ver 1,000 [dollars]” balance in unpaid fines. He also understands 
he has to address the community service he has yet to perform from previous 
sentences throughout the years. Tr. 72-73, 91-92. 
 
Applicant recently had his driver’s license reinstated in March 2009, which he lost 
after his February 1990 DUI arrest. Tr. 76-77. Applicant has been involved in a nine-
year relationship with his fiancé, who works in the area of behavioral health. They live 
together and share expenses. Applicant stated his fiancé “wouldn’t agree on marrying 
me until I got a permanent job that’s steady, and I don’t blame her.” Tr. 78-80. 
 
Applicant stated he is different today from the person who was arrested 11 times 
over a 22-year period: 
 
Well, back then, like I said, I was going through a lot with my parents’ 
illnesses. My dad had cancer, and my mom [had] heart problems and 
diabetes. I did a lot of dumb things, you know. My head wasn’t right. Now 
that – excuse me. Now that they’re gone, I can straighten out my life and 
better myself. And that’s what I want to do. I want to make them proud. 
Excuse me for the outburst.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 
And that’s the difference, I think, that I’m learning. You know, it’s a long 
process. It was a long process for me to learn, but I do learn from my 
mistakes. Sorry about that. Tr. 86-87. 
 
Since working, Applicant has reduced a $36,000 child support arrearage to 
$30,000 in the last three to four years through recoupment from his tax refunds and 
wage garnishment. Tr. 88-90, AE C. 
 
Applicant submitted a work-related reference from a supervisor, who 
complimented him on his work ethic and job performance. AE D. He also submitted two 
Team Achievement Awards from 2008 and 2009 in recognition of his “ongoing 
commitment to outstanding job performance.” AE F, AE E. 
 
Policies 
 
The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 15, the security concern is: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 sets out one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and evidence 
presented that he has had numerous arrests/citations from January 1986 to February 
2008, spanning a 22-year period. His most recent citation occurred one month after 
submitting his SF-86. His arrests/citations cover a wide range to include drugs and drug 
paraphernalia, driving under the influence, hit and run, criminal trespassing, aggravated 
criminal damage, disorderly conduct, shoplifting, driving with a suspended license, 
failure to have proof of insurance, and public nuisance. 
 
He has yet to pay fines and perform community service going back to his 
February 1990 arrest. His recent attempts to address past due court fines and 
unperformed community service fall short when considering the length of time involved 
since they became due and/or were imposed. 
 
Potential mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17 are: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 For reasons discussed supra, none of the potential mitigating conditions under 
this concern are applicable. 
 
Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s behavior is recent and 
not isolated. Considering his behavior, the nature and seriousness of his misconduct, 
his exercise of repeated poor judgment culminating in his recent citation for public 
nuisance one month after submitting his SF-86, and other factors identified supra, I find 
his favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate Guideline E security concerns. His 
conduct raises questions about his ability and willingness to follow the law, and 
ultimately, to protect classified information. His conduct also raises serious doubts and 
questions about his judgment. Further time and additional evidence is needed before I 
can overcome my concerns/doubts regarding Applicant’s questionable judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
 To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
refute personal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the 
whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support a 
favorable decision. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”4 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
   
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d. – 1.k.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
