                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07725 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 25, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines J and G. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In an undated answer Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on June 1, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 24, 2009. The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 6, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since January 
2008. Prior to 2008 he was on active duty in the military for ten years before being 
discharged with a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions due to alcohol 
rehabilitation failure. He is married and has two children ages, 16 and 9 years old.1  
 
 In August 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault and battery of a 
family member. He stated his wife assaulted him and he pushed her and she sustained 
a bruise. He was in the military at the time and was ordered to attend the Family 
Advocacy Program. He received counseling and completed the program. He was 
convicted of a misdemeanor, sentenced to two years of probation and 30 days 
confinement which was suspended.2  
 
 On February 28, 2004, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI). He was speeding at the time he was stopped by the police. He had been 
at a party. He took a breathalyzer test and recorded a Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) of 
.19%. He pled guilty to the offense. He was sentenced to one year in jail and all but one 
day was suspended. He also paid a $1,000 fine and his driver’s license was restricted.3  
 
After this DUI, Applicant attended an alcohol awareness program and completed 
a 30-day residential alcohol treatment program through the military. The program 
consisted of assignment to an addictions group for participation in a structured program 
comprised of group counseling (40 hours), education and therapeutic workshops (40 
hours), physical training, relapse prevention workshop (20 hours), and attendance at 
12-step meetings. He was diagnosed with “alcohol abuse rule out dependency.”4 He 
found it educational, but admitted he was not serious about it.5 
 
 Applicant was arrested on about November 25, 2006, and charged with DUI. He 
admitted he had been drinking alcohol at a friend’s house. He was sentenced to six 
1 Tr. 43, 55-56; GE 3. 
 
2 Tr. 56-58. 
 
3 Tr. 39-41, 58-60. 
 
4 AE C. 
 
5 Tr. 41-43. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
months in jail; five months and 10 days were suspended. He served 20 days in jail. His 
driver’s license was suspended for three years. He was also ordered to attend an 
alcohol awareness program, which he did. He paid a $500 fine.6  
 
 Applicant also went to nonjudicial punishment in September 2007, under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice, for the DUI offense of November 25, 2006, and 
because he was in an unauthorized leave status for two days. He did not tell his 
command that he had been arrested for DUI, his second offense. He was also charged 
with failing to follow orders to not drink and drive and with making a false official 
statement related to the DUI. Applicant admitted that when he was in jail he did not want 
his military command to know of his DUI arrest. He stated that he told his command that 
he had not been arrested for DUI. He admitted he tried to hide the charges from his 
command. It was not until he had to go to court on the DUI charge in August 2007, 
approximately nine months later, that the command became aware of the actual 
pending charges. Applicant attended a 40-hour military alcohol rehabilitation relapse 
program from October 1, 2007 to October 5, 2007. After the nonjudicial punishment 
hearing, Applicant was administratively discharged from the military in November 2007.7  
 
 On March 2, 2008, Applicant signed his security clearance application. On 
September 16, 2008, Applicant provided sworn responses to Interrogatories. He stated 
in his Interrogatories regarding his prior two DUI convictions the following: “I have truly 
learned from these mistakes.” He also indicated that he continued to consume alcohol.8 
 
 On September 29, 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, 3rd 
offense within 5 years, a felony; driving with a revoked license; driving without license, a 
felony; 3rd DWI: refusal of blood or breath test, 3rd offense; and accident: driver did not 
report, property damage greater than $250. Adjudication of this case is still pending. 
Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged, but denies he committed the offenses. 
He stated a friend came to his house and because Applicant had a restricted license, 
the friend drove Applicant’s car to a bar and Applicant was a passenger. Applicant 
admitted he drank alcohol at the bar, but stated his friend was not drinking alcohol. 
When they left the bar the friend who was driving had an accident on the way home and 
hit a pole. He stated his friend jumped out of the vehicle and ran away. Applicant 
panicked because of his prior convictions and left the accident scene and walked home. 
He was arrested later at his home. He refused to provide a blood sample. He cannot 
find his friend to corroborate his story. His friend’s phone is disconnected. He stated he 
met his friend playing basketball at the YMCA. He does not know his friend’s last name. 
He knew him only for a couple of months. He has tried to find his friend but has been 
6 Tr. 60-62. 
 
7 Tr. 49, 60-71. 
 
8 Tr. 45-46; GE 4 pages 2 and 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
unsuccessful. Applicant did not provide any other witnesses to corroborate any part of 
his story.9 
 
A licensed clinical social worker met with Applicant on October 23, 2008, and 
provided the following: 
 
I see no indication of alcohol dependence. The medical diagnosis on his 
chart at this time is alcohol abuse 305.00, not alcohol dependence 303.90.  
 
Prior to meeting with me, [Applicant] participated in two inpatient 
substance abuse treatment programs. It appears he completed each of 
these programs completely and successfully. I have reviewed [Applicant’s] 
history and documents and feel that there is no indication of alcohol 
dependency at this time.10  
 
 Applicant admits he has a history of alcohol abuse. He stated that “alcohol is bad 
for me.” He admitted he cannot drink alcohol because it affects his judgment and his 
life. He stated alcohol destroyed his military career. He knows he has a track record of 
alcohol abuse and he is working on it and doing his best. After his last DUI arrest he 
stated he has abstained from alcohol consumption. He enrolled in an alcohol recovery 
program and attended sessions on June 11, 2009 and June 18, 2009.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
9 Tr. 24-30, 50-54. 
 
10 Tr. 46-49; GE 5. 
 
11 Tr. 29-39, 48-49, 72-75; AE A and B. 
 
5 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant was convicted of DUI twice. His charges of felony DUI, leaving the 
scene of an accident, failure to report an accident and property damage, and driving 
without a license are pending adjudication. He was also found guilty at nonjudicial 
punishment for providing false statements to his command about his DUI arrest. There 
is sufficient evidence to raise both disqualifying conditions. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has two convictions for DUI since 2004. Days before he was arrested a 
third time for DUI, he stated in his Interrogatories that he had learned his lesson. 
Applicant continues to use poor judgment when using alcohol. His latest felony charges 
are still pending. Although Applicant disputes he was the driver of the car at the last 
incident, he failed to provide any corroborating evidence. It appears thatApplicant 
continues to make the same poor choices that cost him his military career. Not until very 
recently has he altered his alcohol consumption, and this did not occur until after his 3rd 
DUI arrest. I find, under the circumstances, that none of the above mitigating conditions 
apply.  
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has three DUI arrests, two resulting in convictions, and he is pending 
adjudication on a third DUI arrest, a felony. He continued to consume alcohol after his 
first two convictions. He was diagnosed by a licensed clinical social worker as an 
alcohol abuser. He completed alcohol counseling and inpatient treatment, but continued 
to use poor judgment when consuming alcohol when he was arrested for his third DUI 
and leaving the scene of an accident. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant had three alcohol-related incidents since 2004. He attended alcohol 
awareness and education and also completed inpatient alcohol counseling. Days before 
his third DUI arrest, he stated he had learned his lesson from his mistakes. He 
continued to consume alcohol after the first two DUI convictions. At his hearing he 
stated that he stopped drinking after his last arrest. He only recently acknowledged he 
 
8 
 
 
uses poor judgment when he consumes alcohol. He has an extended history of alcohol 
having a negative impact on his life, including being discharged from the military 
because of alcohol rehabilitation failure. Applicant lied to his command about his DUI 
arrest. He states that he was not driving when he was arrested for the third DUI, but did 
not have evidence to corroborate any part of his story. I cannot find at this juncture that 
Applicant has overcome his problem with alcohol. He has attended only two alcohol 
counseling sessions in the past couple of weeks. He failed to take heed of his previous 
counseling sessions and it is too early to determine if this time will be different. 
Applicant has had three warnings about the negative impact alcohol has on his 
judgment before his last arrest. He was arrested and went to jail twice for DUI. He was 
discharged from the Navy due to his alcohol issues. Although he claims he now 
understands his alcohol issues, it is too early to determine if his commitment can be 
sustained. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the military until 
his career was cut short due to incidents involving alcohol. He has been afforded 
alcohol awareness and education courses. He continued to make poor decisions when 
using alcohol. He has felony DUI charges pending. Applicant has abstained from 
drinking alcohol since his last arrest and is attending counseling. He has repeatedly 
been given opportunities to make the right decision regarding his conduct when 
consuming alcohol and has failed. Applicant does not yet have a sufficient track record 
to conclude that alcohol is no longer a factor in his choices and decisions. He has failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
9 
 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   2.d-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
