 
 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
          )  ISCR Case No. 08-03604  
                           ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on January 17, 2008. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
 
2
                                                
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On August 12, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG).2 In her Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on September 11, 2008, 
Applicant denied all the allegations.3 She also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 20, 2009, and the 
case was assigned to me February 26, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 
9, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 12, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, the government offered six exhibits, marked as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted. Applicant testified and offered six 
exhibits, which were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. I held the record 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant did not submit further 
documentation. DOHA received the transcript on May 18, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement 
of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 68 years old, holds a bachelor’s degree in political science. She is 
divorced and has no children. Applicant was a career civil servant, working as a foreign 
service officer from 1969 to 1992. She held a high-level security clearance during that 
time. From 1992 to approximately 2003, she was self-employed. Since then, she has 
worked as a consultant for federal contractors and currently holds the position of senior 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Applicant's Answer included five attachments, which will be identified as Answer document: 1 – 
Applicant letter dated September 11, 2008; 2 - Applicant letter dated April 10, 2008; 3 – Personal 
Financial Statement dated April 11, 2008; 4 – Letters to credit reporting agencies dated June 10, 2008; 5 
– Secure facility visit request dated March 28, 2006. 
 
 
3
consultant. She was nominated for a mentorship award because of her consistent help 
and support to junior staff at her employment (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 36-37). 
 
Between 1992 and 2003, Applicant was a small-business owner. She established 
her businesses using online services, without the aid of an attorney. She operated three 
businesses: Business A dealt with food aid and food security; Business B worked on 
issues of human rights and internally displaced persons; and Business C was an effort 
at entrepreneurship and involved with network marketing. The legal form of each 
business changed over time. Applicant testified that Business A was initially established 
as a small Subchapter S corporation. Her attorney and certified public accountant (CPA) 
advised her that the business was not producing sufficient money and she should 
change it to a limited liability corporation (LLC), which she did. Ultimately, it was again 
changed in form to a sole proprietorship (Tr. 81-82; 86). Businesses B and C were 
initially small Subchapter S corporations, and later sole proprietorships (Tr. 82-83; 86). 
The record is silent as to when Applicant changed the legal form of each company. 
 
After the events of September 11, 2001, Applicant lost clients, her businesses 
failed, and in December 2001, she ceased operation. For about one and one-half years 
after the failure, she was unable to obtain work as a consultant, had little income, and 
relied on her federal pension (Tr. 76; 106). She did not have the funds to pay the debts 
of her businesses. When she consulted with her attorney in 2002, he advised her not to 
file for bankruptcy (Tr. 74). He also advised her not to pay the debts, because the 
creditors eventually would write them off (Tr. 46; 77). Her understanding was that this 
“would happen automatically” (Tr. 76). 
 
The attorney wrote to Applicant's creditors advising that she did not have the 
funds to pay the debts or to establish payment plans. He also contacted the creditors 
verbally. The attorney then wrote to Applicant, informing her of his actions. She could 
not provide a copy of his letter. The attorney also did not provide Applicant with 
documentation about his contacts. Applicant did not pay the business debts. At about 
the same time, she became ill, and she turned her attention elsewhere: “And so no, I 
put the whole matter behind me at that point and never thought about it again to tell you 
the truth.” (Tr. 74–79; 84).  
 
In March 2002, Applicant discovered that the debts of her businesses were listed 
on her credit bureau report as her personal debts, under her social security number, 
instead of under her business tax identification number (GE 3; AE A; Tr. 52). She had 
understood that she was not personally liable for these business debts (Tr. 43; 83). 
Between 2002 and 2005, she wrote to the credit reporting agencies approximately once 
per year asking that the debts be removed. She did not provide evidence of these 
contacts. The credit reports were not corrected and Applicant did not follow up (Tr. 94). 
She also testified that she was “tired” and “bored with it.” (Tr. 52-53). In about 2005, she 
became concerned about the debts when she realized she would be completing a 
security clearance application for a position with a federal contractor (Tr. 80). In April 
 
 
4
2008, after she received financial interrogatories from DOHA, she wrote to the three 
credit reporting agencies (AE D). She sent the same letters to the American Fair Credit 
Association and the Bureau of Consumer Protection of the Federal Trade Commission 
asking them to correct her credit bureau reports (AE F). She contacted the same 
organizations again in May 2009 (AE D).  
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling or professional legal help in relation 
to the debts, nor worked with creditors or collection agencies who have contacted her. 
 
MR. JAKSETIC:  Have any of the creditors or any collection agency 
acting on behalf of the creditors asked you to make payment on 
any of the debts in the last two years? 
 
APPLICANT:  Since I haven't talked to any of them, I don't know.  
And have people sent letters suggesting they would cut $5,000 or 
$10,000 off of this or that, yes.  But I -- I didn't respond to those. 
 
MR. JAKSETIC:  Okay.  To the best of your recollection, when was 
the last time you spoke with any creditor that's covered by the SOR 
debts or any collection agency acting on behalf of a creditor? 
 
APPLICANT:  2002. 
 
MR. JAKSETIC:  And you have received correspondence 
suggesting that you pay less than the full amount? 
 
APPLICANT:  Yes. 
 
MR. JAKSETIC:  And you have not followed up on those? 
 
APPLICANT:  That is correct. On a couple I did send my copies of 
my statements that the information was incorrect and blah, blah, 
blah, but – 
 
MR. JAKSETIC:  But basically you have not pursued any 
discussion about settling the debts, correct? 
 
  APPLICANT:  That is correct. (Tr. 56-57). 
 
In her Answer, Applicant noted that she was a victim of identity theft in 2001. 
Although she originally stated at the hearing that all the SOR allegations stem from her 
business debts (Tr. 43; 73), she later testified that she does not recognize allegation 1.f. 
because it relates to a type of credit card that she has never had. She believes that the 
 
 
5
                                                
debt stems from the theft of her identity. That allegation is the only one that is 
connected with identity theft. (Tr. 89-91).  
 
Applicant testified that her Personal Financial Statement of April 2008 is 
essentially accurate as to her current income and expenses.4 Her net monthly income 
as a consultant is $7,650, for a net annual income of approximately $91,800.5 She also 
receives a federal pension of approximately $45,000 per year, which is about $32,500 
after deductions. Her net income from both sources is $10,400 per month or 
approximately $125,000 annually. With monthly expenses of $3,770, she has 
approximately $6,330 remaining each month. Applicant listed no debts in her personal 
financial statement because she pays cash for her purchases and no longer uses credit 
cards (Tr. 92). She did not list payments on any delinquent debts. She occasionally 
provides approximately $400 per month to a niece who is physically ill (GE 3;Tr. 62-72).  
 
The Statement of Reasons alleges 10 debts, totaling approximately $22,400. 
Three debts range from $110 to $216; one debt is $597. The remaining debts range 
from $1,120 to $9,063. The debts became delinquent between 2001 and 2003 (GE 4, 5 
and 6). Applicant has not incurred new debts, has no credit cards, and has no 
outstanding long-term loans (GE 6; AE A, F; Tr. 92). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).6 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition under a 
Guideline does not determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant.  However, 
specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information.  In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
 
4 The single change Applicant noted is that she no longer has the $10,000 in investments, which she lost 
in the stock market (Tr. 72). 
 
5 It is unclear from the record whether Applicant’s position as a consultant is full-time. She 
mentioned working three to six months at a time (Tr. 34) but described her employment income 
as annual (Tr 69).  
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6
                                                
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an Applicant to have access to 
classified information. The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible 
information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a 
security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.8 A person who 
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as her or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The facts presented support application of AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Initially, 
in 2001, Applicant was unable to satisfy the financial obligations that remained after her 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7
small businesses lost clients following the events of September 11, 2001. Although her 
financial situation has improved, she is now unwilling to pay the debts because she 
believes that they were written off, or that she is not personally responsible for them 
because they are debts of her businesses. AG ¶19(c) also applies because Applicant’s 
debts, which started becoming delinquent around 2002, still appear in her latest credit 
bureau report, and remained unpaid as of the date of the hearing.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline includes factors that can mitigate 
disqualifying conditions. The following mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation], and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue; 
 
Applicant’s debts arose when her independent businesses failed. The failure 
stemmed from unique circumstances that are unlikely to recur. However, her debts 
from the business ventures remain, they amount to more than $22,000, and they are 
recent, as they currently remain unpaid. That they were written off by the creditors 
does not, as Applicant seems to believe, absolve her of responsibility for them. 
Moreover, the fact that she has done little about them, other than occasional letters, 
reflects poorly on her judgment. AG ¶20(a) does not apply.  
 
The key element in mitigating condition AG ¶20(b) is that the factors that caused 
the financial problems were beyond an applicant’s control. Certainly, the events of 
September 11, 2001, that led to Applicant's business failure, were unforeseeable and 
beyond her control. However, to be applicable, this mitigator requires also that the 
person act responsibly. Applicant did not respond to queries from creditors over the 
years and has not spoken to any since 2002. In addition, she did not work to resolve 
 
 
8
the disputes about her debts. Even though she has a substantial income, she did not 
retain legal help to assist her to parse out the legal form of each of her business 
entities between 1993 and 2001, or to determine which debts accrued during those 
points in time, and which, if any, became Applicant’s responsibility when the 
businesses failed. Consequently, Applicant could not provide documentation to support 
her claims to the credit reporting agencies, or this agency, that she did not owe the 
debts she disputed. Applicant did not act responsibly, and mitigating condition AG 
¶20(b) cannot be applied. 
 
AG ¶20(e) is relevant. Applicant disputes that she owes these debts because (1) 
they were “written off” by arrangement between her attorney and the creditors; and/or 
(2) they are the debts of her defunct businesses and not her personal debts. Applicant 
testified that her attorney arranged with the creditors to have her debts written off, 
apparently believing that this meant they were no longer her responsibility. She 
provided no evidence supporting her claim of arrangements made with creditors.  
 
Applicant also claims that she is not responsible for the debts because she is 
shielded from liability by the legal form of her businesses. Each of the three businesses 
existed in various legal forms over time, including as corporations and as sole 
proprietorships. However, Applicant failed to provide any evidence to show the point in 
time or the extent to which Applicant may have been protected by the corporate shield 
against liability. The lack of documentary evidence to support her dispute prevents 
application of AG 20 ¶20(e). I resolve Guideline F against Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
 
 
9
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 At the time her debts started to become delinquent, Applicant was a mature and 
experienced adult. Her actions in regard to her debts raise questions as to her good 
judgment. Since 2002, she has taken minimal actions to resolve the situation. When 
contacted by creditors, she did not respond. She sent several letters to the credit 
agencies over the years, but became bored and tired of the issue. She might have 
some protection because the debts stemmed from her businesses. However, despite 
an income that would allow her to retain legal assistance, she has not done so, and the 
question of whether or not she is liable for the business debts remains unanswered. 
Applicant's conduct indicates a negligent attitude and poor judgment in regard to her 
finances.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
