                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10600 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s available information is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On December 16, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  FORM Item 5. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On January 2, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 3, 2009, was provided to 
him by letter dated February 4, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on February 9, 
2009. He was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He failed to submit any materials, comments, or 
objections in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2009. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, the government moved to amend the SOR by adding SOR ¶ 1.r: 
“You are indebted to CRDTONEBNK in the approximate amount of $523 on an account 
that was charged off. As of December 9, 2008, this debt had not been paid.”  
 
I granted the amendment without objection. The amendment was supported by 
the evidence provided and Applicant was provided the required notice.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, 1.h 
through 1.k, and 1.n through 1.q. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.r. 
Concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g, Applicant answered the SOR allegation stating 
“unknown,” and I considered both denied. He did not answer the additional allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.r, and I considered it denied. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old production control dispatcher working for a defense 
contractor.3 He graduated from high school and attended college from July 2006 to 
October 2006. Applicant indicated he was issued a confidential security clearance 
between 1983 and 1991. He provided no information about the agency or employer that 
granted this confidential security clearance. There is no evidence that he ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 5 (2008 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this decision, unless stated otherwise. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
Applicant has never been married and has no children. Applicant’s security 
clearance application shows he has been employed from April 2001 to the present. 
From April 2001 to April 2004, he worked for six different employers, most of them for 
short periods of time. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, 
from April 2004, to the present. Initially, he worked as an “expeditor,” and since April 
2008, he has worked as a production control dispatcher.  
 
In his 2008 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed he had debts over 
180 days delinquent during the last seven years and that, at the time he submitted his 
security clearance application, he also had debts over 90 days delinquent. He 
specifically disclosed having delinquent accounts with the creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.m (a note for a repossessed car), and 1.r. (a credit card). 
 
The SOR alleges 17 delinquent and/or charged-off accounts, totaling 
approximately $19,600, which were listed in the two credit reports.4 Many of the debts 
have been delinquent for a number of years, and can be considered small debts as they 
are for less than $1,000. Applicant provided no explanation about the debts he admitted 
or denied. He failed to explain how he acquired the alleged debts, why they became 
delinquent, what he has done to resolve his delinquent and/or charged off debts, and 
what he plans to do to avoid similar financial problems in the future.   
 
Applicant’s November 2008 personal financial statement (PFS) shows a monthly 
net remainder of $55. His indicated a monthly income of $1,960; monthly expenses of 
$1,500; and two monthly payments totaling $405 (for a car note and a student loan 
payment). He indicated no payments being made to resolve any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
4  An applicant’s credit report showing the delinquent debts alleged in an SOR is sufficient to 
establish the government’s prima facie case. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2003). 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”5 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
 
5  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
6  “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has accumulated 17 delinquent and/or charged-off accounts totaling 
approximately $19,600, many of which have been outstanding for a number of years 
and involve small debts of less than $1,000. He presented no evidence of efforts to pay 
or resolve his financial obligations.  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of 
not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing and his evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to establish circumstances beyond his control 
contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., period of unemployment and/or 
business downturn. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of efforts to contact creditors, or to resolve his 
debts by entering into settlement agreements or payment plans with any creditors. I 
note that in his security clearance application, he claimed that two debts were pending 
settlement. However, Applicant presented no evidence to corroborate his claim. 
Applicant has been consistently employed since April 2001. He presented no evidence 
of efforts to resolve any of his delinquent debts from 2001 to the day he received the 
FORM. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. His inability to pay even relatively 
small debts shows he is financially overextended. He also failed to present any 
evidence that he received financial counseling or that his financial problems are not 
likely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the 
facts in this case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his five 
years working for a government contractor. There is no evidence of any security 
violation, or that he ever compromised classified information. These factors show some 
responsibility and mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. The sparse record evidence fails to convince me 
of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
