                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-10076 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of sexual offenses, culminating with his attempted 
sexual assault on two minors in August 2000. This conduct shows such extremely poor 
judgment that more time without conduct raising security concerns is needed. Applicant 
failed to mitigate sexual behavior concerns. Criminal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF-86) (Item 4). 
On March 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and J 
(Criminal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 3, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated May 20, 2009, was provided to him, 
and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant responded to the FORM on June 16, 2009. The 
case was assigned to me on July 7, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, 
except he updated the status of his probation and the criminal convictions (Item 3). He 
also explained why he believed he was not a security risk. His admissions are accepted 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 He has 
approximately 18 months of college education. He married in 1980 and divorced in 
2002. He remarried in 2008. His children were born in 1971 and 1981. He has been a 
consultant to a defense contractor since 2001. He has never served in the U.S. military. 
In 2000, he quit his job after being told he was going to be fired. The 2000 termination of 
employment resulted from Applicant’s disclosure of his being charged with sexual 
offenses involving children. Aside from the sexual offenses at issue, his file does not 
contain any other adverse information relating to police involvement. For example, he 
has never been charged with any other felonies, any firearms or explosives offense(s), 
and does not have any currently pending charges. He has never been charged with any 
offense related to alcohol or drugs. There is no evidence that he has abused alcohol or 
drugs. There is no evidence of civil court actions or financial delinquencies.   
 
 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated May 21, 2009; 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated May 26, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3The facts in this paragraph are from Applicant’s July 31, 2007, security clearance application 
(Item 4). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct4 
 
 Applicant admitted in his March 14, 2008, affidavit (Item 6) to the following 
relevant conduct in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs: 
 
[Applicant] has a long history of sexual deviancy. Since the early 1970’s 
when [he] was in his 20’s, [he has] looked at women in dressing rooms or 
[through] their bedroom windows. This happened almost weekly in the 
years leading to 2000. During the summers,5 [he] would expose [his] 
genitals to young girls or women at least monthly.  
 
In August 2000, Applicant went to an elementary school parking lot and 
approached two girls, who were ages nine or ten. He engaged them in conversation 
about whether they had reached puberty. Applicant grabbed one of the girl’s shorts and 
pulled her shorts towards him so that he could look inside her shorts. She pulled away 
from him, and Applicant released her. Applicant’s fly was down so that the girls could 
see Applicant’s genitals. 
 
Applicant also noted in his affidavit that his sex offender treating therapist, 
“believes [he] will always be at risk for repeated [sexually deviant] behavior, and 
[Applicant] agree[s] with this assessment].”6      
 
Applicant was charged with two counts of Attempted Sexual Assault of a Child, 
two counts of Indecent Exposure to Minors Under 15, and four counts of harassment 
(SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 3). In July 2001, Applicant pleaded guilty to Counts 1-4, and Counts 5-
8 were dismissed. He received a four-year deferred judgment and sentence as to 
Counts 1 and 2 (both are Class 5 felony-level Attempt to Commit Sexual Assault on a 
Child charges). He received concurrent probation as to Counts 3 and 4 (both are Class 
2 misdemeanor-level Indecent Exposure charges).  
 
Applicant was also sentenced to sixty days in jail (he served 37 days of 
confinement), ordered to attend counseling and register as a sex offender. The court 
ordered probation for ten years. 
 
 In January 2006, the District Attorney’s office notified the court that Applicant had 
successfully completed sex offender specific treatment as required by the terms of his 
deferred judgment and sentence. In January 2006, the District Attorney’s office filed a 
motion to dismiss Counts 1 and 2, and to terminate probation as to Counts 3 and 4.  
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the source for the facts in this section is Applicant’s FORM response, 
especially the Chief Deputy District Attorney’s court filing in June 2009. 
 
5Applicant lives in a part of the United States where the temperature in the non-summer seasons 
is low. 
 
6Applicant concedes in his FORM response that he understands through his therapy, “sex 
offenders are always at risk of re-offense.” However, he believes his concession is a positive, 
rehabilitative development, and argues he is at very-low risk of committing more sexual offenses.    
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
The court failed to issue an order responding to the District Attorney’s January 2006, 
motion. 
 
 In June 2009, the District Attorney’s office asked the court to dismiss Counts 1 
and 2 retroactive to January 2006, and to reflect he has completed his probationary 
sentence as to Counts 3 and 4. The District Attorney’s office indicated the misdemeanor 
convictions for Counts 3 and 4 remain. In June 2009, the court granted the District 
Attorney’s office’s requests.  
  
Sex-offender treatment7 
 
 Applicant received sex-offender treatment from November 2000 to January 26, 
2006 (FORM response). Applicant admitted his sexual misconduct and understands 
that there is a possibility he can re-offend. His acknowledgement of the possibility that 
he will re-offend is a positive development because it enhances his commitment to 
recovery. He demonstrated sincerity and empathy. He is constantly on guard to avoid 
relapsing into sexually inappropriate conduct. His therapist evaluated him under three 
systems for risk of re-offense and determined him to be of LOW to MEDIUM-LOW risk. 
His therapist thought he had less than a 20% risk for re-offense within ten years. His 
risk for re-offense will be reduced if he “continues a program and path of recovery.” 
Applicant married last year and “is surrounded by a healthy support system, which can 
also lower re-offense rates.” There is no evidence that he is currently in a therapy 
program for sex offenders. 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
7The source for the information about Applicant’s sex-offender treatment is a letter, dated June 
22, 2009, from his primary therapist, which is part of his FORM response. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and J (Criminal Conduct).  
 
Sexual Behavior, Guideline D 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior stating: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four conditions relating to sexual behavior that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
Applicant admitted that he viewed women in dressing rooms and through an 
exterior window, while they were in their bedrooms on hundreds of occasions from the 
early 1970s until 2000. During the summers of those years, he exposed his genitals to 
young girls or women at least monthly or approximately 50-100 times. In 2000, he was 
arrested for assaulting two children in a school parking lot. His conduct constitutes 
numerous criminal offenses and they were public to the extent that the offenses 
occurred in public areas. His sexual misbehavior violates important civil and criminal 
rules in our society, and a lengthy history of indecent exposure and voyeurism, 
culminating in attempted sexual assault on two children is conduct a person might wish 
to conceal, as it adversely affects a person’s professional and community standing. 
Such conduct also makes him vulnerable to coercion. He has a lengthy pattern of 
deviant sexual behavior with numerous offenses over many years. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c) 
and 13(d) apply. AG ¶ 13(b) does not apply because Applicant has stopped his sexually 
deviant behavior since August 2000, and there is no record evidence establishing he 
has a personality disorder. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 In August 2000, Applicant committed his most recent offense. At that time, he 
attempted to sexually assault two minors, and exposed his genitals to them. In August 
2000, he was 47 years old and a mature adult. AG ¶ 14(a) does not apply. He has 
served his incarceration and received six years of sex-offense therapy (2000 to 2006). 
However, Applicant described years of sexually-deviant, criminal behavior. He 
committed sexual crimes on hundreds of occasions. Because of this long history of 
sexual offenses, there is still a significant possibility of recurrence and AG ¶ 14(b) can 
only be partially applied. However, Applicant’s sexual misbehavior no longer serves as 
a basis for coercion, exploitation or duress because police and security officials are well 
aware of his conviction for attempted sexual abuse of two children. AG ¶ 14(c) applies 
to mitigate AG ¶ 13(c). Over the last 25 years, he repeatedly viewed women in dressing 
rooms and their bedrooms without their consent and he exposed his genitals to adults 
and children. The minors and adults subjected to his exposure of his genitals did not 
consent to his sexually-deviant, criminal activity and these offenses likely occurred in 
public areas, such as an elementary school parking lot. AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct, Guideline J 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 31(b), 31(d), 31(e), and 31(f) do not apply. 
Applicant committed numerous misdemeanor-level offenses, when he exposed himself 
to female adults and children, and when he viewed women in dressing rooms and their 
bedrooms without their consent. He admitted that he committed these offenses. He 
completed his probation and other court-mandated rehabilitation programs. He was 
sentenced to 60 days of imprisonment, which is substantially less than one year.  He 
currently only has two misdemeanor-level convictions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) clearly do not 
apply because he admitted the offenses and no one pressured him into committing the 
offenses. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are similar and partially applicable. Applicant's last 
offense occurred in August 2000, almost nine years ago. He served his sentence to 
incarceration and paid his fines. He presented strong evidence of remorse, job training, 
and a good employment record. A lengthy period has elapsed to contemplate his poor 
judgment and to respond to therapy. The six years of therapy he received is particularly 
noteworthy. This significant amount of therapy and counseling has had a powerful 
salutary effect. He should understand his criminal offenses have had an adverse impact 
on his lifestyle, family and career as well as on his victims. His demonstrated intent not 
to commit future crimes is encompassed in these two mitigating conditions. He 
accepted responsibility and declared his culpability. He has demonstrated significant 
progress and improved reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; however, more 
progress is necessary to assure and safeguard classified information.  
 
 Nevertheless, Applicant’s criminal conduct is best adjudicated under the Sexual 
Behavior Guideline. It specifically addresses his sexually-deviant behavior, including its 
criminal nature. In contrast to this Guideline’s emphasis on sexual misconduct, the 
Criminal Conduct Guideline encompasses numerous criminal offenses, such as crimes 
against property, crimes against persons, drug crimes, and crimes involving breaches of 
integrity (most crimes in criminal codes are unrelated to sexual misconduct). Even 
though his long-history of criminal conduct disqualifies him from holding a security 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
clearance, I will find “For Applicant” under the Criminal Conduct Guideline to avoid 
duplicative findings.       
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance or public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have 
incorporated my comments under Guidelines D and J in my whole person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some 
warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He completed his probation and other court-mandated rehabilitation 
programs. He served 37 days of imprisonment and paid his fines. He frankly and 
candidly admitted his numerous sexually-deviant acts of criminal conduct. He admitted 
his sexual offenses on his SF-86. He married last year and his spouse supports his 
efforts at rehabilitation. He knows the consequences of being convicted of such 
offenses. He has received six years of counseling and therapy, providing important 
mitigation of his sexual offenses. Aside from the sexual offenses at issue, his file does 
not contain any other adverse information relating to police or judicial involvement. He 
has never been charged with any other felonies (aside from the sexual offenses 
discussed previously) or any firearms or explosives offense(s). He does not have any 
currently pending charges. He has never been charged with any offense related to 
alcohol or drugs. There is no evidence that he has abused alcohol or drugs. There is no 
evidence of other civil court actions or financial delinquencies. Applicant contributes to 
his company and the Department of Defense. There is no evidence at work of any 
disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally 
violate national security. His character and work performance show substantial 
responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant committed numerous misdemeanor-level, sexually-deviant offenses, when he 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
exposed himself to female adults and children, and when he viewed women in dressing 
rooms and their bedrooms, without their consent. He admitted that he committed these 
offenses. He attempted to sexually assault two children in a school parking lot, and he 
exposed his genitals to them. He has only been held accountable for his crimes 
committed in August 2000, and has not been prosecuted for his numerous previous 
sexual offenses. His sexually-deviant criminal offenses were knowledgeable, voluntary, 
and intentional. He was sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. These 
offenses show a lack of judgment and a failure to abide by the law. Such conduct raises 
a serious security concern, and access to classified information is not warranted at this 
time. I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to his sexual 
behavior; however, his criminal conduct is mitigated because it is better addressed 
under the Sexual Behavior Guideline.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
