                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10652
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Jillian L. Oportus, Esq.
July 30, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on May 8, 2008.  On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 16, 2009, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on May 12, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 2,
2009, scheduling the hearing for June 23, 2009.  The Government offered three
exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without
objection. Applicant called one witness, and offered fourteen exhibits, referred to
Applicant’s Exhibits A through N and testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) was received on June 30, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 46 years old and married with one child.  He has a Master’s
Degree of Science in Information and Telecommunication Systems.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as a Senior Computer Consultant, and is applying for a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant obtained his masters degree from a prestigious university.  He has
been working for his current employer since November 2006.  However, since 2002, he
has worked on a government contract.  Applicant testified that he used marijuana with
varying frequency, at least ten times a year, from 1980 through 2009.  On two
occasions during this period, on August 14, 1982, and in November 1984, the Applicant
was arrested and charged with Possession of Marijuana.  On both occasions, he was
found guilty and sentenced to pay a fine and court costs.  (Government Exhibit 2).  He
successfully completed the sentence in both cases.       
At various times while using marijuana, he purchased it for his own use.  He
testified that he has never grown, cultivated or sold marijuana.  (Tr. P. 45).  He
explained that he last used marijuana in February 2009 during the Super Bowl game.
(Tr. pp. 46-47).  Since then he has taken three separate drug tests that have all come
back negative for drugs, including marijuana.  (Applicant’s Exhibits J, K and M).  He has
also signed a notarized statement of intent dated June 2, 2009, indicating that if he were
to ever use any illegal drugs in the future he agrees to the immediate revocation of his
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L, and Tr. p. 49).  The Applicant testified that he
has decided to stop using marijuana because his job and security clearance are more
important than an occasional buzz.  (Tr. p. 49).  Two years ago, he moved from a
college dominated beach community where illegal drug use was common and into a
family oriented community.  He married a dentist who does not use illegal drugs.
Applicant admits knowing that his use of marijuana was illegal, but that he was never
notified by his employer that it was against company policy.  (Tr. pp. 50-51).  Not
wanting the effects of illegal drug use to be transferred to his offspring, during a four
month period, from August 2007 through January 2008, when he and his wife were
trying to conceive a child, he stopped using marijuana.  At some point, he also stopped
for about a year or a year and a half but returned to using marijuana again.  (Tr. p. 73).
He does not believe that he is addicted and he has never sought out any medical
attention for his drug use.              
The Applicant completed a security clearance application dated May 2008 and
subsequently, on October 1, 2008, underwent a personal subject interview by an
investigator who inquired into his background to determine his eligibility for access to
classified information.  He knew at that time that the DoD was concerned about his
history of illegal drug use.  Despite this, he used marijuana again in February 2009.    
 An individual who has worked with the Applicant since 2006 testified that he
interacts with the Applicant on a daily basis.  In his opinion, the Applicant is extremely
3
conscientious, and a  person of strong moral character who is hardworking, diligent, and
honest and recommended for a position of trust.  (Tr. pp. 28-37).     
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s manager, coworkers, brother-in-
law, past school mate and professional colleagues and friends attest to his
trustworthiness and reliability.  He is considered intelligent, hardworking, conscientious
and diligent in the performance of his job.  (Applicant’s Exhibits B, C, D, E and F).     
Applicant’s annual performance appraisals for 2007 and 2008 are favorable.
(Applicant’s Exhibits H and I).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as:
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances.
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
4
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The extent to which the participation is voluntary
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes.
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”                                              
      
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
5
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.
The evidence shows that the Applicant’s eighteen years history of marijuana use
began in high school and continued through college and through his professional work
history.  On average he used it at least ten times a year from 1980 through 2008.  His
most recent use of marijuana occurred in February 2009, just four months before the
hearing.  He contends that he has now stopped using marijuana and has signed a
statement of intent indicating such.  However, under the particular circumstances of this
case, the statement of intent does not hold much weight given his long period of use
and the fact that he used it as recently as February 2009.  He used marijuana knowing
that it was prohibited by law.  Common sense would dictate that it is also clearly
prohibited by his employer and by the Department of Defense, even though he states
that he has never been notified of such.  The Applicant’s conduct demonstrates poor
judgment and untrustworthiness.  He is not currently eligible for a security clearance.  If
he can continue to remain drug free in the future, he may be eligible for a security
clearance sometime in the future, but not now.       
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 22(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  Although Mitigation Condition
26(b)(4), a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as, a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation is applicable,
it is not controlling in this case.  I find his past use of illegal drugs to be too recent and of
serious security significance.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline
H, Drug Involvement.    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 46 years old, mature,
educated, intelligent, successful, well respected, and he has worked for a government
contractor since at least 2002.  He has made some very poor decisions by using
marijuana for over the past eighteen years and has only four months of abstinence.
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above, when
viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole person assessment of
poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard classified information.  
6
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and does meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against
the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).      
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.                                                            
                                                                 
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
