 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00829 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on October 2, 2008. On March 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on May 5, 2009.  The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on May 6, 2009.  
Applicant received the FORM on May 12, 2009. He had 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM to submit any additional material. He did not respond. The FORM was forwarded 
to the hearing office on July 7, 2009, and assigned to me on July 9, 2009. Based upon a 
 
2 
 
 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 1, 2009, Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer employed with a Department of Defense 
contractor seeking to maintain a security clearance.  He has been employed with the 
defense contractor since October 1987. He is widowed and has two adult children. (Item 
4)   
 
On October 2, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Security Investigations Processing, (e-QIP). He answered “No” in response to Section 
28.a “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 
“No” in response to Section 28.b “Are you currently 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
(Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts: 
a $2,699 account placed for collection in November 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5 at 5, 7; 
Item 6 at 1); a $1,304 credit card account that was charged off in November 2006 (SOR 
¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 1); a $4,735 credit card account that was 
charged off in November 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 1); a 
$3,288 credit card account placed for collection in November 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5 
at 6; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 2); a $7,451 credit card account placed for collection in 
November 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 at 6; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 2); a $4,753 delinquent 
account with a bank placed for collection in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 at 7); and 
a $4,221 delinquent account with a bank placed for collection in October 2006. (SOR ¶ 
1.g: Item 5 at 7)   
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he requested paperwork to 
apply for a hardship withdrawal from his 401(k) savings plan. He did not meet any of the 
criteria for a hardship withdrawal. He then requested a loan from his 401(k) savings 
plan. He has a pre-existing loan taken out in March 2006 for a period of five years. He 
cannot modify the loan and cannot pay the loan off in one lump sum. The current 
balance is $4,600.  He claims he has no access to any other commercial or private 
source to resolve his debts. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant admits that he deliberately omitted his delinquent debts in response to 
questions 28.a and 28.b on his e-QIP application. He claimed:  
 
Like I told the investigator, [Investigator’s Name], on October 30, 2008, I 
felt too embarrassed to acknowledge to anyone, family, friends or work, 
that I had incurred that much of a financial obligation and was not able to 
continue to make payments.  (Item 3 at 1)  
 
3 
 
 
 
The record evidence contains no information about Applicant’s current financial 
situation. There is no information in the record explaining the cause of Applicant’s 
financial problems. No information was submitted regarding Applicant’s work 
performance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has seven delinquent 
accounts, totaling approximately $28,451. All of these debts have been delinquent since 
2006.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility. He did not explain what caused his 
financial problems. There is nothing in the record evidence indicating Applicant’s current 
financial status.  His delinquent accounts remain unresolved.   
 
 Based on the record evidence, I conclude FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not 
apply. It appears that all of Applicant’s delinquent accounts became delinquent in 2006. 
However, Applicant did not explain what caused his financial problems. I cannot 
conclude that there were circumstances beyond Applicant’s control contributed to his 
financial problems.  
 
 
5 
 
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling.  All of the debts remain delinquent. It is unlikely that his financial problems 
will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant attempted to obtain a 
hardship withdrawal from his 401(k). He did not qualify for a hardship withdrawal so he 
then attempted to obtain a loan against his 401(k). He already had borrowed against his 
401(k) and did not qualify for an additional loan. Regardless of these efforts, Applicant 
claims that he cannot resolve these accounts. For this reason, FC MC ¶ 20(d) is given 
less weight.  
 
Applicant’s failure to honor his financial obligations remains a security concern. 
He has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant deliberately omitted his 
delinquent debts that were over 180 days old in response to section 28.a and his 
delinquent debts that were currently 90 days old in response to section 28.b on his e-
QIP application, dated October 2, 2008. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 
16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) applies to this allegation. Applicant admits that he did not list his 
delinquent accounts because he was too embarrassed to admit that he had incurred 
that much debt.   
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply under Guideline E. Guideline E is found 
against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided no information 
about his work performance. All seven debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. 
Applicant did not explain the cause of his financial problems. He claims he is unable to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his security 
clearance application by omitting his delinquent debts raise security concerns under 
personal conduct. Embarrassment does not excuse Applicant from providing truthful 
information on his security clearance application. Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
