                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00798 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 16, 2009, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on May 19, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on May 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
27, 2009. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and 
submitted additional material dated June 19, 2009. Department Counsel did not object. 
The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b and denied the allegation in ¶ 1.a. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 65 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since 
November 2005. He was unemployed from February 2005 until November 2005. Prior 
to then, he was employed from 1998 to 2005 for a private company. Applicant is a 
college graduate. He was married in 1964 and lists that he was divorced in 2004. 
However, he also lists that he remarried in 1997, which would be prior to his divorce.1 
 
 There are two debts listed in the SOR. Applicant disputes a debt owed in SOR ¶ 
1.a to a telephone company ($189) that is now in collection status. He was unhappy 
with the telephone service and terminated the contract. Although he states in his answer 
to the SOR that he has provided correspondence to the company advising them of the 
dispute, he failed to include this documentation to substantiate his claim. He stated it is 
a matter of principle that he has not paid his account. He disputed the debt on his credit 
report.2 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $664,401.23 for 
a tax lien. It appears the tax lien is for liabilities for tax years 1982 through 1994 and 
other federal taxes for tax years 1995, 1996 and 2001. Applicant stated that the tax 
liens were for “penalties and interest that were greater than any actual tax due and were 
the result of a period of self-employment.”3  
 
 Applicant entered into an Offer in Compromise (OIC) with the IRS in August 
2004. He claimed that the debt was reduced in accordance with the OIC to $63,179. He 
was to pay $10,000 within 90 days and then pay $1,829.47 a month for 40 months. 
Applicant lost his job in February 2005 and ceased making payments in July 2005. 
Applicant provided statements from the IRS, which indicated that a refund was owed to 
him for tax year 2007. That refund was applied to back taxes owed by Applicant for tax 
years 1996 ($926) and 2001 ($518.78). Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR the 
following: “IRS has applied refunds to the amount due and shows me to owe $4,478.42 
1 Item 4. Applicant may have incorrectly listed the requested information on his Security 
Clearance Application. I am unable to determine the accuracy of these dates. I have not considered this 
information for disqualifying purposes.  
 
2 Item 3.  
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
as of April 21, 2008.”4 However, according to the documents submitted by Applicant 
from the IRS, this is the balance owed for tax year 1996 and does not represent the 
entirety of Applicant’s unpaid balance owed to the IRS.  
 
 Applicant notes in his answer that he filed his 2008 taxes and was due a refund 
of $645 that was to be applied to his outstanding tax lien. He also stated that “all tax 
returns have been filed on a timely basis for several years.” It is unclear whether 
Applicant filed his tax returns on time for the tax years he failed to pay his taxes. No 
explanation was provided as to why he failed to pay his taxes on time for a period of 16 
tax years. 
 
 Applicant provided four documents titled: Certificate of Release of Federal Tax 
Lien dated June 5, 2009, that lists the place of filing as two different counties in his 
state. It appears the $664,401.23 tax lien is released.5 Applicant did not provide an 
explanation as to what actions he took to obtain the release. If he paid the delinquent 
amount, he did not explain how much he paid, when he paid it, or how he obtained the 
funds to pay it.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Item 8. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
Applicant had a $664,401.23 federal tax lien entered against him in September 
1996. He provided no information that he attempted to take any action on this lien until 
 
5 
 
 
2004, when he entered an OIC. He provided no explanation as to why he failed to pay 
his taxes for 16 tax years. Applicant also had a debt to a telephone company that is in 
collection status. I find both of the above disqualifying conditions have been raised by 
the evidence. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Applicant had a federal tax lien for $664,401.23 owed for 16 tax years. 
Apparently, he failed to pay income tax. He offered no explanation as to why he failed to 
pay his taxes for a period of 16 tax years. He did not enter into an agreement with the 
IRS to settle his tax debts until 2004 when he entered into an OIC. He lost his job and 
stopped paying the OIC. He failed to provide information as to what the status of the 
OIC was after he stopped paying the monthly payments he promised to pay. He 
provided a certificate of release of the tax lien dated June 5, 2009, but failed to provide 
any information as to how he obtained the release. There is no evidence as to how 
much he may have paid on the remaining debt or what transpired after he stopped 
paying on it. In addition, no information or explanation was provided as to where he 
obtained the money to pay the debt.  
 
Applicant’s failure to pay his federal income taxes for a period of 16 tax years is a 
serious security concern. He recently received a release of lien, but failed to provide an 
explanation as to what actions he took to obtain the release. His repeated failure to pay 
 
6 
 
 
his taxes casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. I find mitigating 
condition (a) does not apply. Applicant provided no explanation or evidence to show that 
there were conditions beyond his control regarding his delinquent taxes or that he acted 
in good faith to resolve them. Applicant did not obtain an OIC until 2004. His delinquent 
taxes were for a period of 16 tax years beginning in 1982. I find mitigating condition (b) 
does not apply.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence he received financial counseling. It appears 
that, with the release of the tax lien, the largest debt alleged is satisfied and his financial 
problems are under control. I find mitigating condition (c) applies. 
 
Applicant did not pay his taxes for a period of 16 tax years. He did not work out a 
settlement with the IRS until 2004. He did not provide any explanation as to why he 
failed to pay his taxes on time or why he waited years to resolve his tax debts. He failed 
to explain how he eventually resolved his tax debt. I do not find, under the 
circumstances, that waiting years to pay his taxes is a good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. I find mitigating condition (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant explained in his answer that he disputed his debt for telephone 
services. He terminated his contract because he was dissatisfied with the service. He 
did not provide any documented proof to substantiate the basis of his dispute, but did 
provide a copy of his credit report to show he disputed the debt and it is being 
investigated. Therefore, I find mitigating condition (e) partially applies. 
 
Analysis 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to pay his 
federal income taxes for tax years 1982 through 1994 and had a tax liability for tax 
years 1995, 1996, and 2001. He failed to provide any explanation for his failure to 
comply with the tax rules. In 2004, he entered into an OIC with the IRS, but due to a 
period of unemployment, he stopped making payments on the settlement. He failed to 
explain what, if any, arrangements were made with the IRS. He provided a release of 
tax lien dated June 5, 2009, from the IRS, but he did not explain what actions he took to 
obtain the release. Applicant also disputed a telephone debt. He did not provide any 
documentation to substantiate his dispute, but did dispute it on his credit report. 
Applicant did not provide enough evidence to explain the circumstances of his large tax 
debt or the reasons he failed to pay his taxes. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the relevant circumstances presented by the record in this case, it 
is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
