                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
      
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01083 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Position (SF 86) to obtain a 
security clearance as part of his employment on October 15, 2008. On April 16, 2009, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F for financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 21, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 26, 2009. He denied one and 
admitted 22 of the allegations under Guideline F with explanation. He also provided 
information why the financial considerations security concern should be mitigated. He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on May 13, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on May 21, 2009. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 22, 2009, for a hearing on June 11, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The government offered four exhibits, marked 
Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. 
Applicant testified on his behalf. Applicant offered six exhibits, marked Applicant 
Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through F, which were received without objection. The record was 
held open at Applicant's request so he could submit additional documents. Applicant 
timely submitted one document with six attachments marked App. Ex. G, which was 
received without objection (See, Gov. Ex 5 Memorandum, dated July 9, 2009). DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 25, 2009. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing on May 28, 2009. Applicant is entitled 
to 15 days notice of hearing (Directive E3.1.8). Applicant discussed with Department 
Counsel the hearing date of June 11, 2009, prior to the mailing of a Notice of Hearing. 
Accordingly, actual notice was given more than 15 days prior to the hearing. Applicant 
signed for the Notice of Hearing only 14 days prior to the hearing. He waived the 15 
days notice requirement (Tr. 5-6). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 37 years old and has been a knowledge management analysis for a 
defense contractor since September 2008. He is single and a college graduate. He is 
working on his master's degree and only has to complete his thesis for award of the 
degree. Applicant completed a financial statement as part of counseling with a debt 
management firm. He listed on the form that his monthly income at his new position is 
$3,682, with monthly expenses of $3,408, leaving a monthly remainder of $274. 
Applicant stated at the hearing that his income is accurate but his monthly expenses are 
now significantly less at about $2,600, leaving monthly discretionary funds of 
approximately $1,100. Applicant moved to another state to accept his current job. When 
he moved, he could not break the lease for his apartment so he had to continue to pay 
that rent until April 2009. In addition, he initially leased a car for his transportation need 
at the new location. He purchased a car in January 2009 to cut expenses. With only one 
rent payment and a lower car payment, his expense are now less each month (Tr. 24-
25, 32, 34, 44-46, App. Ex. E, Debt Management Plan, dated May 13, 2009 at 12-14).   
 
There is no security allegation against Applicant for criminal conduct. However, 
the government presented a criminal justice information report showing that Applicant 
was convicted and fined for uttering a check against insufficient funds in 1992. He was 
again convicted and fined for uttering another insufficient funds check in 1997. The 
government contends that while the uttering of insufficient funds checks in 1992 and 
 
3 
 
 
1997 were not criminal conduct for security clearance purposes, this conduct does 
indicate financial problems for Applicant as early as 1992. Applicant noted that both 
checks were for less than $30 to the same merchant. He did not learn the first check 
was dishonored until three years later when he was stopped for a traffic offense. For the 
second offense, he received a warrant. He immediately paid both checks and court 
costs when he became aware of the offenses. These were the only insufficient funds 
checks he uttered in over 27 years of having a checking account (Tr. 12-15, 23-24, 44-
46; Gov. Ex. 2, criminal justice report, dated October 15, 2008).  
 
Applicant graduated from college in 2001. He was employed in two different jobs 
until March 2003 when he started working as a knowledge analyst. He was laid off from 
that job in 2005 when the company downsized. He was unemployed for about three 
months before he found similar employment at another company as a knowledge 
manager at a higher salary. He was laid off from that job in April 2006 when the 
company lost a contract and did not have the resources to keep him employed. He 
returned to his home state, lived with his parents to preserve resources, and sought 
employment. After three months, he was employed by a government agency at about a 
third of his former salary. His previous salary was $65,000 yearly, and this new job paid 
only $19,000 yearly. He continued to look for employment in his field until he was hired 
by his present employer in September 2008. Tax returns for the period show total tax 
income going from $55,762 in 2005, to $29,056 in 2006, to $18,811 in 2007. His present 
salary is about $70,000 per year. Applicant's performance evaluation for his first few 
months with his present employer is that he exceeds expectations (Tr. 15-18; Gov. Ex. 
1, Questionnaire for Sensitive Position, SF 86, dated October 15, 2008; See. App. Ex. 
B, Form 1040, Federal tax return, 2005; App. Ex. C, Form 1040, federal tax return, 
2006; App. Ex. D, Form 1040, federal tax return, 2007; App. Ex. F, Performance 
Evaluation, dated December 2008). 
 
When Applicant started employment in his field in 2003, he opened credit card 
accounts and store credit accounts to purchase items and take advantage of store sales 
and deals. He felt he was living within his means and his salary would cover his 
expenses. Unfortunately he was laid off and lost employment, and was unable to make 
his credit card payments (Tr. 25-34). Prior to the layoffs, his bills were current (Tr. 42-
43). Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 3, credit report, dated March 4, 2009; and Gov. Ex. 4, 
credit report, dated October 15, 2008) show that Applicant had the following delinquent 
debts; a bank credit card account in collection for $185 (SOR 1.a); a store credit card 
charged off for $450 (SOR 1.b); a credit card account charged off for $1,444 (SOR 1.c); 
a major credit card account charged off for $3,232 (SOR 1.d); a store credit card 
account past due for $137 on a balance of $997 (SOR 1.e); A store credit card past due 
for $35 with a balance of $281 (SOR 1.f); two different store credit card accounts with 
the same collection agency for $2,617 (SOR 1.g), and $655 (SOR 1.h); a bank credit 
card in collection for $4,368 (SOR 1.i); a computer company credit account in collection 
account for $2,192 (SOR 1.j); another bank credit card account in collection of $1,855 
(SOR 1.k); four collection accounts with the same collection agency for three different 
stores for $700 (SOR 1.l), $2,812 (SOR 1.m), $1,671 (SOR 1.n), and $1,081 (SOR 1.o); 
a loan account in collection for $1,912 (SOR 1.p) another loan collection account for 
 
4 
 
 
$478 (SOR 1.q); a collection account for $139 (SOR 1.r); a collection account for $1,036 
(SOR 1.s); a collection account for $2,374 (SOR 1.t); a collection account for $1,705 
(SOR 1.u); a collection account for $198 (SOR 1.v); and a collection account for $61 
(SOR 1.w).  
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application when starting employment 
with his present employer in September 2008. He was interviewed by security agents in 
November 2008. He did not start to address his delinquent debts until April 2009. Until 
that time, he stated he had to pay the rent on the apartment he left when he moved to 
his new location and he had to lease a car. He was able to purchase a new car in 
January 2009 lowering his car payments. In April 2009, he completed the apartment 
lease. He stated he now has sufficient funds to address his delinquent debts. He started 
working with a debt management company and reached an agreement for them to 
assist him in May 2009. His first payment to them is due in July 2009. (Tr. 40-44; App. 
Ex. E, agreement, dated May 13, 2009).  
 
Applicant has attempted to reach a settlement with the creditors. He sent them 
letters dated April 15, 2009, copies of which are attached to the Response to the SOR, 
offering to settle at a set amount. While the letters are dated April 15, 2009, the certified 
mail receipts are postmarked May 7, 2009. The settlement offered is usually for 40% of 
the debt. In some of the offers, it is for 40% of the credit limit on the credit card which is 
significantly less than the amount of the debt. He has not received a response from the 
fifteen creditors listed at SOR 1.a, 1.c, 1,e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.q, 1.s, 
1.t, and 1.u. (Tr. 46-47; See Response to SOR, dated April 26, 2009; App. Ex. A, 
Updated Response, undated; App. Ex. G, Updated SOR response, dated June 25, 
2009).  
 
Applicant reached a settlement for $225.07 with the store creditor for the $450 
debt at SOR 1.b. Payment is due no later than July 20, 2009 (App. Ex. G, Updated SOR 
response, dated June 25, 2009, attachment 6). 
 
The payment of the credit card debt at SOR 1.d is included in Applicant's debt 
management plan (App. Ex. E, debt management plan, dated May 13, 2009). The first 
payment under the plan was made on June 15, 2009 (App. Ex. G, Updated SOR 
Response, dated June 25, 2009 at Attachment 1). 
 
The debts listed at SOR 1.i and 1.p are the same debt. Applicant reached a 
settlement of $1,912 with the collection agency for this debt. Applicant will make $40 
monthly payments until a total of $478 is paid. At that time, Applicant's account will be 
considered current. Applicant will receive a new credit account from the creditor with a 
balance owed of $1,147.22, requiring him to make regular monthly payments. The first 
two $40 payments have been made (App. Ex. A, Updated SOR Response, dated April 
26, 2009, at attachments G-1, G-2, G-3, and G-4; App. Ex. G, Updated Response to 
SOR, dated June 25, 2009, at attachment 4). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant reached a settlement of $450.36 with the collection agency for the 
$700 collection account for a store at SOR 1.l. The first payment was made and the last 
payment is due on July 18, 2009 (App. Ex. A, Updated Response to SOR, dated April 
26, 2009, at attachments J-1; App. Ex. G, Updated Response to SOR, dated June 25, 
2009, at attachment 3). 
 
Applicant reached a settlement of $83.11 with the collection agency for the 
$138.50 collection account at SOR 1.r. The debt was paid in full (App. Ex. A, Updated 
Response to SOR, dated April 26, 2009, at attachments O-2 and O-3; App. Ex. G, 
Updated response to SOR, dated June 25, 2009, at attachment 5). 
 
Applicant disputed the $198 collection debt at SOR 1.v. stating he had no 
information on the debt (App. Ex. A, Updated response to SOR, dated April 26, 2009, at 
attachment T). The collection agency informed Applicant of the origin of the debt and 
contact information for the original creditor (App. Ex. G, Updated Response to SOR, 
dated June 25, 2009, attachments 2a and 2b, dated May 12, 2009). Applicant has not 
taken any action since receipt of this collection agency's response. 
 
Applicant reached a settlement of $24.40 with the collection agency for the $61 
debt at SOR 1.w. The settlement was paid (App. Ex. A, Updated Response to SOR, 
dated April 26, 2009 at Attachments T-1, T-2, T-3, and T-4). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts as admitted by Applicant and listed on the 
credit reports are a security concern raising financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), FC DC AG ¶ 
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(consistent 
spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ration, and/or other financial 
analysis). The debts were incurred when Applicant first received a good paying job in 
2003, and he opened store and credit card accounts to purchase items. Applicant was 
laid off after opening the accounts, and was unable to meet his financial obligations. 
Applicant has only recently made inquiries about the accounts and paid some of them.  
 
7 
 
 
There is a history of an inability to meet financial obligations since Applicant took no 
action concerning the delinquent debts for over four years. While Applicant thought he 
was living within his means, he spent freely with his first paychecks incurring a lot of 
debt on a number of credit cards and store credit accounts which shows his spending 
was beyond his means.  
 
 I considered the financial considerations mitigating conditions (FC MC) raised by 
Applicant's testimony. FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) 
and it does not apply. Applicant's delinquent debts arose in 2005 and he took no action 
to even inquire about them until April 15, 2009. Almost all of the debts are unpaid, so 
the debts are current. The debts are from various stores and credit cards, so he 
incurred debts frequently. Since the debts are not paid, they cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial 
problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant started new 
employment at a good salary and liberally incurred debt using store credit and credit 
cards believing his new job provided him the resources to pay the debts. He was laid off 
twice, could not find good employment, and could not pay his debts. He moved back 
home, lived with his parents, and found work at a small fraction of his previous salary. 
Applicant presented no information that he made any inquiries about or paid any of his 
delinquent debts during this time. Applicant started a good paying position in his field in 
September 2008. He was interviewed by security investigators in November 2008 and 
knew of the security concerns for his delinquent debts. He did not start to inquire about 
the delinquent debts or make any payments on his debt until after he received the SOR. 
Applicant said he did not have funds to pay the debts until then. However, since he had 
a good job at a good salary starting in September 2008, he could have at least 
contacted the creditors to make arrangements to pay the debts when he had funds 
available. He did not commence any actions on his delinquent debts until he realized 
the debts were a security concern and affected his employment. He does not receive 
credit under this mitigating condition since he did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 I considered FC MC AG ¶ 23(c) (the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or under control) and it does not apply. Applicant entered an agreement with a 
credit management company to assist him with the management of his debts. He 
receives credit counseling as part of the plan. However, he received replies to only a 
few of the letters he sent to creditors, and resolved only a few of his debts.  His finances 
are not yet under control nor are his debts being resolved. 
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts". For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
The applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual 
debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he paid off each debt listed. The entirety of an applicant’s 
financial situation and his actions can reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent 
to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is 
credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct 
may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. All that is required is that the 
applicant demonstrated he has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.   
 
Applicant has not established a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts.  
He does not have a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. Applicant took no action 
to resolve his debt until after receipt of the SOR and his realization that his delinquent 
debts affected his future employment with the defense contractor. He knew of the 
security significance of his delinquent debt in November 2008 when interviewed by the 
security investigator. He took no action at that time to even inquire of the creditors about 
the debts. He only took action after receipt of the SOR. At that time, he entered a debt 
management program and sent letters to creditors with settlement offers. He has been 
able to settle and pay only a limited number of his debts. The settlement offer letters, 
the limited agreed settlements, and the limited debt payments, do not establish a 
meaningful track record of debt payments and thereby a good-faith effort to resolve 
debt. In addition, Applicant's promises to pay debts in the future do not rise to the level 
of a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Applicant has not presented sufficient 
information to indicate a good-faith effort to pay creditors or resolve debts. His finances 
are not under control and he has not acted responsibly. He has not presented sufficient 
information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations. 
 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant opened credit accounts 
and incurred debt as soon as he had a good paying job. His debts became delinquent 
when he was laid off and could no longer meet his obligations. He was employed 
thereafter, albeit at a lower salary, but he made no effort to inquire about and resolve 
any of his delinquent debts. Even after gaining meaningful employment and a good 
salary, he made no effort to inquire about or resolve his delinquent debts until he 
received the SOR and knew of the security clearance significance of his delinquent 
debts. His lack of action shows he was irresponsible, unconcerned and careless about 
his financial obligations. This leads to a determination that he may be untrustworthy, 
unreliable, exercise bad judgment, has poor self control, and unwilling to abide by rules 
and regulations. His financial irresponsibility indicates he may behave the same towards 
the safeguarding of classified information. Overall, on balance the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.w:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
