KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: There is merit in Department Counsel claim that the record is devoid of facts from
which to infer that Applicant could not be subjected to coercion through his relatives.  The Judge
erroneously relied on 50 USC  § 435.  The Judge’s favorable decision as to Guideline E is also
not supported by the record evidence.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 04-11664.a1
DATE: 04/06/2007
DATE: April 6, 2007
In Re:
-----------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-11664
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 17, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
A determination that the immediate family members...in question are not agents of a foreign power or in a1
position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could force the individual to choose between loyalty to the
persons involved and the United States.”  Directive  ¶  E2.A2.1.3.1.
“Contact and correspondence with foreign citizens are causal and infrequent...”  Directive  ¶  E2.A2.1.3.1.2
2
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On
June 27, 2006, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to
Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge erred in
applying Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition (FIMC) 1;  whether the Judge erred in applying1
FIMC 3;  and whether the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had satisfactorily explained his failure2
to provide information about his foreign financial holdings and his prior criminal record was
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  We reverse the decision of the Judge.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant is a 38 year-old-supply clerk for a defense
contractor, with prior military service during which time he held a security clearance.  
In October 1986, Applicant was charged and convicted for public intoxication.  In December
1986, Applicant, who lived on a naval base as a military dependent, was stopped at a random gate
search.  The search yielded a small amount of a “controlled substance” which Applicant has denied
actually belonged to him.  In March 1987, Applicant was charged and convicted of Driving While
Intoxicated (DWI) and charged with trespassing on government property.  In December 1987
Applicant was convicted of possession of alcohol by a minor.
In filling out his security clearance questionnaire, Applicant answered “no” to Question 24.
This question inquired whether Applicant had ever been charged or convicted of any offense relating
to alcohol or drugs.  Applicant stated that he believed that the question only required him to go back
10 years.
In 1993, while stationed with the U.S. Army in Korea, Applicant met a woman, a Korean
national, whom he married in 1997.  Applicant’s wife has a brother, who is a truck driver in Korea.
Applicant states that he has only met his brother-in-law once.  In 2002 Applicant and his wife
purchased a house in Korea.  The house is in the wife’s name only in order to avoid extensive
paperwork.  Applicant’s spouse has about $150,000 in Korean bank accounts.  Applicant did not list
the house on the security clearance application nor the bank accounts “because he did not believe
he was required to do so.”
“An immediate family member, or person to whom the individual has close ties of affection or obligation, is3
a citizen of, or resident in, a foreign country.”  Directive  ¶  E2.A2.1.2.1.
3
The Judge also found that the Republic of Korea is a stable democracy, the U.S.’s seventh
largest trading partner and largest export market.  The U.S. is a prime target of economic espionage,
Korea being listed as among the top seven nations conducting such activities against the U.S.
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1.  Department Counsel does not challenge
the Judge’s findings.  Therefore, the findings are not an issue on appeal.  
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. V. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 581, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
A.  Application of FIMC 1
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s wife and brother-in-law raise security concerns under
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FIDC) 1.   As a consequence, the burden shifted to3
Applicant to establish that to grant him a security clearance is clearly in the national interest.  See
Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  Because Applicant elected not to request a hearing, the Judge was limited to
considering the evidence in the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  
Department Counsel argues that the record is devoid of facts from which to infer that
Applicant could not be subjected to coercion through his relatives.  We find merit in Department
Counsel’s argument.  In the first place, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s wife is not an agent
of a foreign power is based upon the definition of that term contained in 50 U.S.C. § 435 et seq.  The
Board has previously held that this statutory definition is self limiting in nature and inadequate to
address the security concerns arising under Guideline B.  See ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 4-6 (App.
4
Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  Therefore, to this extent at least, the Judge’s conclusion is arbitrary, capricious,
and contrary to law.
Additionally, the Judge does not discuss the extent to which Applicant’s wife’s house,
located in Korea, and in which Applicant resides, and Korean bank accounts constitute a potential
means of coercion.    The Judge made only a conclusory observation that these matters are not of
security significance but did not explain why.  Decision at 6.  In doing so the Judge failed to consider
an important aspect of the case.  See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002).  Again,
we conclude that this is error.
B.  Application of FIMC 3
Board precedent presumes that an applicant’s family ties are neither casual nor infrequent.
See ISCR Case No. 02-24267 at 7 (App. Bd. May 24, 2005).  The Department Counsel does not
challenge the Judge’s findings that Applicant has only met him once.  However, there is no evidence
in the record to establish the extent of any communication between Applicant, or Applicant’s wife,
and the brother-in-law.  While it is possible that neither have any contact with him, Applicant bears
the burden of persuasion to establish this mitigating condition.  We conclude that the evidence in the
FORM is insufficient to do so and that the Judge’s application of FIMC 3 is in error.
C.  Judge’s conclusion that Applicant provided a credible explanation for neglecting to
provide information on security clearance form
We have examined the record evidence concerning Applicant’s having failed to list his
criminal past and his wife’s Korean property holdings.  As regards the latter, he stated that, since the
relevant questions were directed explicitly to him, he did not believe that Applicant was required to
list his wife’s holdings.  The FORM contains a character reference from a warrant officer who knows
Applicant and who opines that Applicant “is a very literal person and if someone were to ask him
questions about ‘YOU’ he is only going to give. . .information about himself.”  Item 3.  We conclude
that the Judge’s credibility determination on this matter is supported by substantial evidence.
However, as to the former, we reach a different conclusion.  Applicant states that, since he
was only to list his residences for the previous 10 years, he believed that he was only required to list
criminal activity within that period as well.  However, question 24 is clear and unequivocal in its
language–“Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or
drugs?” (emphasis added).  There is no evidence in the FORM to demonstrate why such a belief
would be reasonable under the circumstances, especially to someone who by nature takes matters
as literally as the character reference mentioned above suggests.  Having elected not to have a
hearing, Applicant denied himself the opportunity to provide a more detailed explanation as to his
understanding of what information he was expected to provide and to submit himself to questioning
by Department Counsel and by the Judge.  We conclude that Applicant has not sustained his burden
of persuasion under Guideline E and that the Judge’s favorable decision as to that Guideline is
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  Given the lack of record evidence in this case, we
conclude that there is no reason to remand the decision to the Judge.
5
Order
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
