KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct
DIGEST:  Applicant is a 34-year-old engineering technician with a federal contractor.  In 2003, he
was arrested and charged with second-degree assault, two counts of malicious property damage, and
carrying a concealed weapon.  He was found guilty of these three counts.  He was sentenced to 18
months confinement for each count.  He was ordered to pay $1,500 costs and fees of $55, and
ordered to complete an anger management program.  After approximately 3 months of incarceration,
execution of sentence was suspended and he was placed on 24 months supervised probation.  He
successfully completed both a 26-week anger management program and his probation He
successfully mitigated the security concerns about criminal conduct.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 05-02974.h1
DATE: 04/30/2007
DATE: April 30, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-02974
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHRISTOPHER GRAHAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F.  Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is a 34-year-old engineering technician with a federal contractor.  In 2003, he was
arrested and charged with second-degree assault, two counts of malicious property damage, and
carrying a concealed weapon.  He was found guilty of these three counts.  He was sentenced to 18
months confinement for each count.  He was ordered to pay $1,500 costs and fees of $55, and
ordered to complete an anger management program.  After approximately 3 months of incarceration,
execution of sentence was suspended and he was placed on 24 months supervised probation.  He
successfully completed both a 26-week anger management program and his probation He
successfully mitigated the security concerns about criminal conduct.  Clearance is granted.
Tr. at 11, 14.1
Id. at 11.2
Id. at 13-14.3
Id. at 16-18, 23.‘4
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant.  DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20,
1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, and
modified, on September 27, 2005, detailing the basis for its decision  security concerns raised under
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of the Directive.  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October
7, 2005 and November 1, 2005, and elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge.  The
case was assigned to another administrative judge on June 20, 2006, and transferred to me on
December 18, 2006, due to caseload considerations.  The Notice of Hearing was issued on December
28, 2006.  I convened a hearing on January 17, 2007, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  The government offered
thirteen exhibits, marked as exhibits 1-13.  Applicant offered no exhibits.  I kept the record open
until January 26, 2007, to allow Applicant to file additional documents.  On January 22, 2007, he
filed three exhibits, marked as Applicants Exhibits A, B, and C.  The government had no objection.
Applicant’s Exhibits A through C are admitted.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on
January 25, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the one allegation in the SOR.  The admission is incorporated herein as
a finding of fact.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence, and upon due consideration
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 34-year-old engineering technician with a federal contractor.   He is divorced,1
has two children, one of whom resides with him, and he is engaged.   He has an associates degree2
in engineering technology, has no military service, and this is his first security clearance.3
In 2003, Applicant and his former wife, who started separation proceedings in 2001, had
drawn up a separation agreement between the two of them, but the document had not been filed in
court.  Applicant’s ex-wife was in a relationship with another man, who had called Applicant on the
phone and had threatened to “kick his butt.”  Applicant had been drinking, lost his temper, drove to
this man’s house, and pulled into his gravel driveway with such speed that he could not stop, sliding
into the man’s car, forcing it through the garage door.  He then initiated a fist-fight with this person.4
On May 6, 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with second-degree assault, two counts
of malicious property damage over $500, and carrying a concealed deadly weapon.  He was found
Id. at 14-15.5
Applicant=s Exhibit B (Letter of Completion, Anger Management Program, dated June 15, 2004) at 1.6
Applicant=s Exhibit A (Letter From Probation and Parole, dated January 18, 2007) at 1.7
Tr. 22.8
Id. at 36.9
Applicant=s Exhibit C (Employee Evaluations, dated from August 15, 2006, going back to February 25, 1997) at 1-2.10
Tr. at 36-39.11
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
12
Id. at 527. 13
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960).14
4
guilty of the first three counts and found not guilty of the concealed weapons charge.  He was
sentenced to 18 months confinement for count one and for each of counts two and three, with count
three to run consecutively to count one.  He was ordered to pay $1,500 restitution, pay court costs
and fees of $55, and ordered to complete an anger management program.  After approximately 3
months of incarceration, execution of sentence was suspended, counts two and three were changed
to run concurrently with count one, and he was placed on 24 months supervised probation.   He5
successfully completed both a 26-week anger management program and his probation.6 7
When asked what he had learned from the anger management class he stated:  “Actually I
learned a lot so ever since I completed it I control my anger much better, especially with the kids and
especially with the additional two kids that I have now, so it takes a lot.  And from this overall
incident I did learn a lot.  I wish it didn’t come to that but this is a life lesson I will definitely learn
from it.”8
Applicant’s supervisor stated that Applicant was a trustworthy and dependable employee, that
he had done everything requested of him, and was an outstanding employee.   He observed no anger9
management issues, and in his last employee evaluation dated August 15, 2006,  he rated him10
outstanding.11
POLICIES
“No one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”   As Commander in Chief, the President has12
“the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position that will give that person access to such
information.”   The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants13
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to do so.”   Each security clearance decision “must be a fair and impartial14
common sense determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information
Directive ¶ 6.2.15
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).
16
See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.
17
 
Government Exhibits 2-12.18
5
and the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy.”   An applicant “has the ultimate burden of15
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.”16
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the
disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline.  In evaluating
the security worthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also assess the adjudicative
process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive: nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances; frequency and recency of the conduct; age of the Applicant; motivation of the
applicant, and the extent to which the conduct was negligent, wilful, voluntary, or undertaken with
knowledge of the consequences involved; absence or presence of rehabilitation; and probability that
the circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future.  The decision to deny an individual
a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   It is merely17
an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
CONCLUSIONS
The government established its case under Guideline J.  Criminal Conduct Disqualifying
Condition (CC DC) E2.A10.1.3.1.(Allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged) applies.  Applicant admitted his arrest and convictions.
And the court records  clearly set forth the findings, convictions, fines, probation, and other terms.18
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) E2.A10.1.3.1. (The criminal behavior was
not recent) applies.  This criminal offense occurred almost four years ago. 
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition E2.A10.1.3.2. (The crime was an isolated incident)
applies.  This is the only criminal activity on Applicant’s record.  
Another mitigating condition is CC MC E2.A10.1.3.3. (The person was pressured or coerced
into committing the act and those pressures are no longer present in that person's life).  Applicant’s
then-wife’s boyfriend had called him and threatened to “kick his butt.”  Given the circumstances,
this is certainly a provocation.  However, Applicant could have avoided the situation, but did not.
Instead, he voluntarily chose to drive to the man’s house and provoked a fist fight.  Applicant put
himself into the situation that resulted in an altercation.  Applicant was not pressured into
committing the act.  This mitigating condition does not apply. 
Id.20
Id.21
6
Finally, CC MC E2.A10.1.3.6. (There is clear evidence of successful rehabilitation) is
applicable.  Applicant successfully completed a 26-week anger management course.  He stated that
he had learned a valuable lesson by taking the course.  He relates better with his children and step-
children.  He shows no anger management problems at work.  He is no longer involved in the
situation with his former wife.  I find that he has rehabilitated himself, and conclude Guideline J for
Applicant.
Whole Person Analysis
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a persons life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”   Available, reliable19
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination.   In evaluating Applicant’s case, in addition to the disqualifying and20
mitigating conditions, I also considered the whole person concept in evaluating Applicant’s risk and
vulnerability in protecting our national interests.  21
As noted above, Applicant’s offenses are sufficiently serious to raise a security concern.  His
actions were knowledgeable and voluntary.  He is 34 years old, sufficiently mature to be fully
responsible for his conduct.  The motivation for his offense was anger at his wife for her marital
infidelity.  His conduct was not prudent or responsible.  This offense creates doubt about his
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and it calls into question his ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Applicant presented substantial extenuating and mitigating evidence.  His anger towards his
wife for her betrayal of their marriage is reasonable and understandable.  His wife was seeing another
man.  That man called Applicant and threatened to kick his butt.  Applicant’s crime occurred in the
heat and passion of the moment.  He successfully completed an anger management course and his
court-ordered probation.  His crime occurred in May 2003, and not recent.  He disclosed his criminal
record on his SF 86.  He has been an outstanding employee for the contractor.  Their subsequent
divorce and the passage of time has relieved much of the stress of this situation, and reduced the
potential of more violence.  The absence of evidence of any prior violence, his forthright and candid
statement at his hearing, and his evident sincerity about avoiding future violence all weigh in his
favor. 
In sum, the likelihood of recurrence is very low because sufficient evidence was presented
about improvement in his mental and emotional understanding of his situation, and responses to
stress.  The counseling and therapy he received are particularly important because he now has better
and clearer perceptions of his reaction to stress and understands how to avoid problematic situations.
His rehabilitative efforts have removed my doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment.
7
The totality of the record raises no reasonable and persistent doubts about Applicant's ability
to protect classified information and to exercise the requisite good judgment and discretion expected
of one in whom the government entrusts its interests.  I conclude it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Christopher Graham
Administrative Judge
