KEYWORD: Foreign Influence; Foreign Preference
DIGEST:  Forty-four year old Applicant, who immigrated to the U.S. from Egypt in 1986, and
became a naturalized U.S. citizen, resides in the U.S. with his Egyptian-born U.S. citizen wife and
four U.S. born minor children.  He has spent the last 21 years in the U.S. and is a loyal and dedicated
U.S. citizen.  Given the mitigating evidence submitted, and under the “whole person” concept,
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence
because of his strong connections to the U.S.  Under the specific facts in evidence, the government’s
security concerns have been mitigated.  Clearance is granted. 
CASENO: 05-01998.h1
DATE: 04/30/2007
DATE: April 30, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-01998
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROBERT J. TUIDER
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William F. Savarino, Esq.
GE 1.  (Electronic Standard Form (SF) 86, Security Clearance Application is dated May 2, 2003.1
This action is taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as2
amended and modified (Directive).
2
SYNOPSIS
Forty-four year old Applicant, who immigrated to the U.S. from Egypt in 1986, and became
a naturalized U.S. citizen, resides in the U.S. with his Egyptian-born U.S. citizen wife and four U.S.
born minor children.  He has spent the last 21 years in the U.S. and is a loyal and dedicated U.S.
citizen.  Given the mitigating evidence submitted, and under the “whole person” concept, Applicant
has mitigated security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence because of his
strong connections to the U.S.  Under the specific facts in evidence, the government’s security
concerns have been mitigated.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On May 2, 2003, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted a Security
Clearance Application (SF-86).   On November 3, 2005, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals1
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.   The2
SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns under Guideline
B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference).  
On November 22, 2005, Applicant responded to the SOR, and submitted his case for decision
without a hearing.  By an undated facsimile, Applicant amended his answer and requested that his
case be decided by a hearing, and his request was approved by Director, DOHA.  On February 16,
2006, Applicant further amended his Answer to SOR, which was received by DOHA on February
21, 2006.  On March 31, 2006, Department Counsel filed a ready to proceed letter.  
On April 10, 2006, the hearing office received the case and it was assigned to another
administrative judge.  On June 5, 2006, Applicant’s counsel submitted his notice of appearance.  On
June 19, 2006, the case was reassigned to me due to caseload considerations.  On August 9, 2006,
DOHA issued a notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for August 24, 2006.  The hearing
commenced and was completed on the scheduled date.
The government submitted nine documents that were marked as Government Exhibits (GE
1 through 9), and were admitted into the record without objection.  Applicant credibly testified and
submitted eight documents that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through H.  Department
Counsel objected to AE G, which I overruled, and the remaining documents were admitted into the
record without objection.  
On September 6, 2006, DOHA received the transcript.  I held the record open to afford both
parties the opportunity to submit additional evidence.  On September 8, 2006, Applicant submitted
eight additional documents that were marked as AE I through P.  AE I through L are DOHA
Administrative Judge cases favorable to Applicant’s position.  On October 16, 2006, Department
Counsel forwarded Applicant’s additional documents to me indicating he had no objection to AE
3
I through L, but did object to AE M through P, if they were being admitted for administrative notice
purposes.  I admitted AE I through P, and AE M through P were admitted for the limited purpose
of providing additional argument to Applicant’s position.  I took administrative notice of the
information contained in GE 5 through 9, and AE F through H.  See discussion under Procedural
Matters, infra.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
At the hearing, Department Counsel asked me to take administrative notice of Government
Exhibits 5 to 9, U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Egypt, September 2005; U.S.
Department of State, Consular Information Sheet, Egypt, January 18, 2006; U.S. Department of
State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2004, February 28, 2005; U.S. Department of
State, Dual Nationality, January 18, 2006; and U.S. State Department, Office of the Coordinator for
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2004, April 2005, respectively.  
Additionally, Applicant submitted AE F to H, which are duplicate or additional documents,
and I considered them for administrative notice as well.  Duplicate documents are AE F (GE 6) and
AE H (GE 5).  Additional documents are National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 1999; U.S. Department of
State, Background Note: United Arab Emirates, February 2006 (AE I); The Office of the United
States Trade Representative, United States to Begin Free Trade Negotiations This Week with the
United Arab Emirates and Oman, March 8, 2005 (AE J); The White House press release, The United
States – UAE Bilateral Relationship, February 22, 2006 (AE K); U.S. Department of State, Secretary
Rice Meets With Leaders of the United Arab Emirates, February 23, 2006 (AE L); and U.S.
Department of State, United Arab Emirates, 2005 Investment Climate Statement – United Arab
Emirates (AE M).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No.
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802
F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)).  The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR
proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or taken from government reports. See Stein,
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for
administrative notice).  Applicant did not object to my consideration of Exs. I to IX for purposes of
administrative notice. Tr. 15-33. 
Following the presentation evidence, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by
adding the following additional allegation under Guideline B:
2.f. Your sister and her husband are citizens of Egypt and residents of the United Arab
Emirates.
GE 1, supra n. 1, section 1.1, at 1.3
Assistant Secretary of Defense Memorandum, dated August 16, 2000, for Secretaries Of The Military4
Departments, et al, SUBJECT: Guidance to DoD Central Adjudication Facilities (CAF) Clarifying the Application of
the Foreign Preference Guideline, commonly known as the “Money Memorandum” states in part the possession or use
of a foreign passport may be a disqualifying condition unless sanctioned by the U.S. government.  The Memorandum
further stated that any clearance be denied or revoked unless the applicant surrenders the foreign passport.  GE 5.
4
I allowed Department Counsel’s motion to amend over Applicant’s objection.  Applicant’s
testimony provided the basis for the amendment to the SOR.  Both parties were given additional time
to present additional evidence, discussed supra.   
FINDINGS OF FACT
In his Answer and Amended Answer, Applicant admitted in part several of the SOR
allegations. His admissions are incorporated into my findings, and after a thorough review of the
record, I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant testified and I found his testimony credible.  Applicant is 44 years old.   He was3
born and raised in Egypt.  Applicant went to a large university in Alexandria, Egypt, and was
awarded a BSC degree in electrical engineering in May 1986.  In 1986, at age 24, he immigrated to
the U.S. for “economic improvement” with the intent of becoming a U.S. citizen.  Tr. 23.  Applicant
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1994, and has held a U.S. passport since February 1994.
GE 1.
After arriving in the U.S., he secured employment primarily in food service-related ventures
and, in particular, working in and/or owning businesses that sold bagels.  While a co-owner of a
bagel shop, Applicant met and developed a rapore with one of his patrons, the president and chief
executive officer (CEO) of his current employer.  The CEO subsequently offered Applicant a
position as a systems designer where he has been continuously employed since May 2002.  Applicant
is a first-time applicant for a security clearance.  There were no allegations of security violations
against him, or negative judicial involvement.  
Applicant possessed an Egyptian passport issued to him in May 1992, which was the only
passport he was eligible to have until he became a U.S. citizen in January 1994.  His Egyptian
passport expired in May 1999 (SOR ¶ 1.b.).   When his passport expired, he did not renew it, and4
did not have any other foreign passport.  Subsequently, Applicant returned his expired Egyptian
passport to the Egyptian Embassy.  Tr. 11, 81, 137, Answer to SOR.  Applicant also held dual
citizenship as an Egyptian as a result of birth in Egypt to Egyptian parents (SOR ¶ 1.a.).  In addition
to the oath Applicant took when he became a U.S. citizen, he took the additional affirmative step of
renouncing his Egyptian citizenship in a sworn statement.  Tr. 36-39, Answer to SOR.  The SOR
alleged Applicant retained his Egyptian passport in order to eliminate Egyptian visa requirements
(SOR ¶ 1.c.).  Applicant denied this allegation and following Applicant’s denial, the government did
offer any evidence to rebut Applicant’s denial.
Applicant’s 68-year-old mother is an Egyptian citizen and a permanent resident of the U.S.
After receiving her “green card” in 1994, she moved to the U.S. and resides with Applicant and his
5
family (SOR ¶ 2.a).  Tr. 101.  In August 2000, Applicant’s mother applied to become a U.S. citizen.
AE A.  Applicant’s mother has completed all aspects of the application process to become a U.S.
citizen except for meeting the English reading, speaking, and writing requirements.  AE A.
Although she failed the English literacy requirement portion of her citizenship examination, she
remains determined to overcome this shortcoming as evidenced by her having completed an
intensive English study course.  AE A.  Applicant’s mother was a housewife her entire adult life.
Her husband, Applicant’s father, passed away in 1974.  She receives a small widow’s pension from
her late husband’s employer, an Egyptian insurance company.  Applicant’s mother is not politically
affiliated with or connected in any way with the Egyptian government.  Tr. 45.
Applicant was previously married from February 1990 to August 1994.  That marriage ended
by divorce.  He has been married to his second and current wife since October 1994.  Applicant’s
second marriage was an “arranged” marriage by his mother.  Tr. 46.  Applicant’s wife is Egyptian
born, and became a U.S. citizen in October 1991.  GE 1.  Applicant’s wife was trained as an
accountant, but is currently a housewife caring for their four U.S. born minor children.  Tr. 94-95.
Since arriving in the U.S., Applicant traveled to Egypt on four separate occasions (SOR  ¶
2.c.).  In 1994, Applicant’s visit to Egypt was for the purpose of getting married.  In 1995, Applicant
visited Egypt for the purpose of visiting his dying grandmother.  In 2004, Applicant’s current
employer sent him to Egypt on a one-week company sponsored trip.  In 2005, Applicant’s current
employer sent him to Egypt on a company sponsored trip a second time to deliver a work-related
report at a conference.  AE E.  Applicant used his U.S. passport on all four of these visits to Egypt.
Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, and brother-in-law are resident
citizens of Egypt (SOR ¶ 2.b).  Applicant’s mother-in-law is the general manager for a private
company that makes pipeline tubes.  Tr. 49.  His father-in-law is a retired systems engineer, who was
employed by a private company.  Tr. 48.  Applicant’s sister-in-law lives with her parents and is
employed as an accountant with the same company as her mother. Tr. 51.  Applicant’s brother-in-law
also lives with his parents and just completed high school and plans to go to college.  Tr. 52.
Applicant’s father-in-law has never visited his family in the U.S. since he and his wife were married,
and his mother-in-law visited his family in the U.S. one time approximately one year after they were
married in 1995.  Tr. 53.  Applicant’s wife visited her family in Egypt twice since they were married
in 1994.  Tr. 54.  Applicant’s contact with his in-laws averages approximately three telephone calls
per years, typically on holidays, when his wife initiates calls to her family.  Tr. 54.  Applicant
estimates that his wife telephones her family approximately four times a year.  Tr. 54.  
Applicant’s sister and brother-in-law are citizens of Egypt and residents of the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) (SOR ¶ 2.f.).  His sister is employed as a dentist and his brother-in-law is employed
as an accountant for a private oil company.  Applicant last saw his sister in November 2005 when
he was visiting the UAE on a work-related and funded trip to the UAE.  Tr. 84.  Applicant estimates
he speaks to his sister on the telephone approximately two to three times a year.  Tr. 85.  Neither
Applicant’s sister or brother-in-law are employed by or associated with the Egyptian or UAE
governments.  
Applicant’s wife does not know the specific nature of his work nor does he discuss his work
with her.  Tr. 56.  Applicant’s in-laws in Egypt do not know the nature of his work.  When Applicant
6
traveled to Egypt in 2004 and 2005 on his company sponsored trips, he stayed in a hotel and did not
visit his in-laws.  Tr. 58.  
Applicant has received extensive security training from his company which covered the
procedures to follow if contacted or approached by a foreign national.  In this regard, Applicant was
approached by an individual from Morocco while on a company sponsored trip and this individual
asked him to subscribe to two U.S. trade magazines on his behalf.  Applicant became uncomfortable
with this request and promptly reported the request to his company president.  This contact was
reported to the FBI, who investigated this contact, and took no further known action.  Tr. 61.  
Before beginning employment with his current employer, Applicant closed down his bagel
business in 2002.  As part of the liquidation process and as part of his responsibilities, he transferred
the remaining share of  $1,500.00 to $2,000.00 to one of his former business partners, who happened
to be vacationing in Egypt (SOR ¶ 2.d.).  Tr. 62-63, 97, 109.  This transfer took place at the request
of his former business partner.
Applicant sent $2,000.00 to a U.S. citizen friend’s father in Egypt for his medical care in
2001 (SOR ¶ 2.e.).  His friend’s father needed $2,000.00 immediately to get admitted to a hospital.
His friend was at work and had forgotten to take his wallet with his credit card, otherwise his friend
would have sent the money himself on his father’s behalf.  Applicant accommodated his friend under
these circumstances and his friend’s father was admitted to the hospital.  His friend promptly repaid
Applicant and that was the extent of Applicant’s involvement with this money transfer.  Tr. 66-68.
Other than these two self-reported money transfers, Applicant has never sent any other funds to
Egypt.  Tr. 69, 109-111.
Applicant has no assets in Egypt.  He and his wife rent a home in the U.S, and own two
automobiles.  Applicant and his wife exercise their right to vote in the U.S., pay taxes, and exercise
all rights and privileges of being U.S. citizens.  Tr. 103.  Applicant’s wife is actively involved with
school activities for their four children.  Tr. 104.  He further testified he would promptly report any
contacts of any kind from a foreign government to the proper authority.  He testified credibly of his
loyalty to the U.S. and how proud he was to be involved in the type of work he does as a defense
contractor. 
Applicant provided one work-related reference letter from a colleague, who is a retired Air
Force Officer having served as a Security Forces Officer.  This letter was quite compelling in
describing Applicant’s character and trustworthiness concluding that Applicant “is one of the most
honorable people I have ever met.”  AE C.
The president and CEO of Applicant’s company, who holds a top secret clearance,  testified
on his behalf.  The CEO stated that Applicant was given a pay raise based on his work performance
that his company is “very, very satisfied with [Applicant’s] dedication, commitment and . . . high
integrity to the organization.” Tr. 116.  The CEO added that he would trust Applicant “with anything
that we have in the company,” and that Applicant needed a security clearance to perform the duties
required of him.  Tr. 116.  The CEO stated Applicant is held in very high regard by company
employees, and is very reliable and trustworthy. 
7
As indicated, supra, the government and Applicant offered documents prepared by the U.S.
Government on Egypt and the UAE.  The collective evidence discusses the strong and friendly
relationship the U.S. enjoys with Egypt and the UAE.  These documents, GE 5 to 9 and AE F to M,
discuss a range of topics pertaining to those two countries, which I considered in their entirety. 
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which sets forth adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into
disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC), which are used to determine an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process provision in Section E2.2, Enclosure
2, of the Directive.  An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and
common sense decision.  
Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision.
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at
Directive ¶ E2.2.1: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of
the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness
of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes;
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which could mitigate security concerns pertaining to the relevant adjudicative guidelines are set forth
and discussed in the Conclusions section below.  Since the protection of the national security is the
paramount consideration, the final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that
the issuance of the clearance is “clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” In reaching
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a5
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006)
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v.Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
?The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable,6
[evaluates] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and [decides]
whether Applicant [has] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App.
Bd. July 6, 2006). 
8
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”   The5
government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a potentially disqualifying
condition under the Directive. Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating
condition.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15 provides, “The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable clearance decision.”  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition  never shifts to the
government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).6
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government predicated upon trust and confidence. It is a relationship that transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is because of this special relationship the
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to
whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty,
and patriotism are not at issue in these proceedings.  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically
provides industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  Security clearance
decisions cover many characteristics of an applicant other than allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism.
Nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or
in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate legal
precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly above, I conclude the following
with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR:
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
See fn 4, supra.7
9
Under Guideline C, a security concern may exist when an individual acts in such a way as
to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Directive E2.A3.1.1.
Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) 1.  The exercise of dual citizenship; and
FP DC 2: Possession and/or use of a foreign passport; are acts that demonstrate a foreign preference.
At the time the SOR was issued, Applicant held dual citizenship by birth in Egypt to Egyptian
parents, and he held an expired Egyptian passport.  Applicant has formally renounced his Egyptian
citizenship and surrendered his expired Egyptian passport to the Egyptian Embassy.  These acts
permit application of Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition (FP MC) 4: Individual has expressed
a willingness to renounce dual citizenship, and demonstrate full compliance with the Money
Memorandum.   Applicant has not only met applicable mitigating conditions in effect at the time his7
SOR was issued, he has exceeded them.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Under Guideline B, a “security risk may exist when an individual’s immediate family,
including cohabitants, and other persons to whom he or she may be bound by affection, influence,
or obligation are not citizens of the United States or may be subject to duress.  These situations could
create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise of classified
information. Contacts with citizens of other countries or financial interests in other countries are also
relevant to security determinations if they make an individual potentially vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or pressure.”  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.1.
This allegation is based on the fact that Applicant’s Egyptian citizen mother lives with his
family, that he has Egyptian citizen in-laws living in Egypt, that he has an Egyptian sister and
brother-in-law living in the UAE, that he took four trips to Egypt in 1994, 1995, 2004, and 2005, and
the fact he sent money on two occasions to Egypt to a former business partner in 2002  and on behalf
of a friend’s father to cover his hospital admission costs in 2001.
Two of eight possible foreign influence disqualifying conditions (FI DC) could raise a
security concern in this case.  FI DC 1 applies where an “immediate family member, or a person to
whom the individual has close ties of affection or obligation, is a citizen of, or resident or present
in, a foreign country.” Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.2.1. “Immediate family members” include a spouse,
father, mother, sons, daughters, brothers, and sisters.  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1. Although Applicant’s
in-law are not “immediate family members” as defined by the Directive, they can be said to be
individuals with whom he has “close ties of affection or obligation.”  The government produced
evidence to establish FI DC 1 because Applicant’s in-law are Egyptian citizens currently living in
Egypt with whom he has occasional contact.  Also, Applicant has an Egyptian sister and brother-in-
law living in the UAE.  
FI DC 2 applies when “sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress exists.”  Directive ¶
E2.A2.1.2.2.  The fact that Applicant’s mother is an Egyptian citizen living with his family raises
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item E3.1.14.8
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item E3.1.15.9
ISCR Case No. 99-0597 (December 13, 2000).10
Compare ISCR Case No. 03-10954 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006); with ISCR Case No. 03-10312 at 6-9 (A.J. May11
31, 2006); ISCR Case No. 02-21927, 2006 DOHA Lexis 229, at *15-*45 (A.J. May 17, 2006) (discussing the parameters
and application of FI MC 1, especially the scope and definition of “agent of a foreign power”).  50 U.S.C. § 1801(b)
defines “agent of a foreign power.” The statutory definition for “agent of a foreign power” was explicitly included in
Executive Order 12968, Aug. 2, 1995, Part 1.1f, which established, “a uniform Federal personnel security program for
employees who will be considered for initial or continued access to classified information.”  The Appeal Board’s
decision in ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2007) reiterating the broad definition of “agent of a foreign
10
this as a potential concern.  Noteworthy, is the fact Applicant’s mother moved to the U.S. in 1994
and in 2000 applied for U.S. citizenship.  Apart from failing the English literacy portion of her
citizenship examination, she has done everything required to become a U.S. citizen.  Regarding the
English literacy requirements, she has also taken an intensive course in English to meet this
requirement.
Although, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not,
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B, if only one relative lives in a foreign country,
and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.  See
ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,
2001).  Because FI DCs and 1 and 2 apply, Applicant has the burden to present evidence of rebuttal,
extenuation or mitigation to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
a security clearance. 
Once the government meets its burden of proving controverted facts  the burden shifts to an8
applicant to present evidence demonstrating extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances.9
Further, the government is under no duty to present evidence to disprove any Adjudicative Guideline
mitigating conditions, and an administrative judge cannot assume or infer that any particular
mitigating condition is applicable merely because the government does not present evidence to
disprove that particular mitigating condition.10
Security concerns based on foreign influence can be mitigated by showing the applicability
of one or more foreign influence mitigating conditions (FI MC).  FI MC 1 recognizes that security
concerns are reduced when there is “[a] determination that the immediate family member(s), (spouse,
father, mother, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters), cohabitant, or associate(s) in question are not
agents of a foreign power or in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could
force the individual to choose between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the United States.”
Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1.  Notwithstanding the facially disjunctive language of FI MC 1, the Appeal
Board has decided that Applicant must prove that his family members, cohabitant or associates are
not agents of a foreign power, and are not in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way
that could force Applicant to chose between the person(s) involved and the United States.  ISCR
Case No. 02-14995 at 5 (App. Bd. July 26, 2004).  Applicant satisfies the first prong of FI MC 1
even under the Appeal Board’s very broad definition of “agent of a foreign power.”  Also, the11
power” does not address why Executive Order 12968 is not controlling. See ISCR Case No. 04-03720 at 4 (App. Bd.
June 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-02233 at 3 (App. Bd. May 9, 2006), see generally Nickelson v. United States, 284
F.Supp.2d 387, 391 (E.D. Va. 2003) (requiring agency to follow own rules in security clearance determinations); ISCR
Case No. 04-12648 at 10-13 (App. Bd. Oct. 20, 2006) (Harvey, J., dissenting) (explaining limitations on Appeal Board’s
authority to reverse). 
See ISCR Case No. 03-17071 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 22, 2006), see also ISCR Case No. 02-2454 at 4-5 (App.12
Bd. June 29, 2004) (employee of a city government was an “agent of a foreign power”). 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005) (quoting ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar.13
29, 2002)).
The Appeal Board has not increased an applicant’s burden of persuasion in cases involving contacts with14
family members living in Israel.  This situation may be compared to the Appeal Board’s decision to place a “very heavy
burden of persuasion” on applicants to demonstrate that contacts with immediate family members living in Iran do not
pose a security risk. See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) (stating an applicant has “a very heavy
burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when parents and siblings live in Iran); ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very heavy burden” standard when applicant’s family members live
in Iran).   
Another less significant reason not to apply FI MC 1 is the history of terrorist activity in Israel.  The Appeal15
Board has limited the applicability of FI MC 1 where there is a history of terrorist activity in the foreign country in
question.  ISCR Case No. 03-22643 (App. Bd. Jun. 24, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-22461 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2005).
11
Appeal Board has specifically indicated that receipt of a foreign pension does not cause a person to
be an agent of a foreign power.    12
The second prong of FI MC 1 provides that it is potentially mitigating where the “associate(s)
in question are not . . . in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could force the
individual to choose between loyalty to the person involved and the United States.” The Appeal
Board interprets this language as establishing an absolute standard; i.e., an applicant must
affirmatively prove that there is no possibility that anyone might attempt to exploit or influence a
foreign relative or acquaintance in the future.  See ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17,
2006) (“[FI MC] 1 does not apply because, as is well settled, it requires that Applicant demonstrate
that his relatives are not in a position which could force Applicant to choose between his loyalty to
them and his loyalty to the United States.”); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005).
Egypt and the UAE enjoy a cordial relationship with the U.S.  The Appeal “Board has warned
‘against reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations
when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.’”   In any event, Applicant should not be placed into13
a position where he may be forced to choose between loyalty to the U.S. and his in-laws living in
Egypt and his sister and brother-in-law living in the UAE.   See ISCR Case No. 03-06267 at 4 (App.14
Bd. Jan. 24, 2006); ISCR Case No. 02-30535 at 4 (App. Bd. May 4, 2005).  Thus, FI MC 1  cannot15
be applied.  
FI MC 3 can mitigate security concerns where “contact and correspondence with foreign
citizens are casual and infrequent.”  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.3.  Applicant’s contacts are limited to
occasional telephone contact, but more accurately his contact at least in the case of his in-laws in
Egypt is vicariously maintained through his wife’s telephone calls to family members in Egypt.  He
personally makes limited telephone calls to his sister in the UAE.
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item E3.1.14.16
Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Item E3.1.15.17
ISCR Case No. 99-0597 (December 13, 2000).18
12
Two of the four visits Applicant made to Egypt were of short duration.  The first visit in 1994
was to get married, and the second visit was to visit his dying grandmother.  The last two visits in
2004 and 2005 were company sponsored trips in which he did not visit his in-laws.
Applicant has failed to establish that his contacts with her siblings-in-law are casual under
the definition established by the Appeal Board.  See ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan.
7, 2007).   The term “casual” means a contact that is “more fortuitous in nature than planned or
designed” or “resulting from, or occurring by chance.”  ISCR Case No. 04-08870 at 3 n.1 (App. Bd.
Nov. 29, 2006).  Arguably this definition of “casual” is inconsistent with the Directive, as it so
narrows the applicability of FI MC 3 that it would only be applicable in very rare circumstances.  In
any event, I must follow the directions of the Appeal Board and accordingly, I conclude that FI MC
3 cannot be applied.  
Applicant does not have any financial interests in Egypt.  This fact does not mitigate the
foreign influence concerns based on FI DC 1 or 2.  See ISCR Case No. 04-02233 at 3 (App. Bd. May
9, 2006).
I conclude that no Guideline B Mitigating Conditions apply, and I expressly and specifically
indicate that I have not relied “explicitly or implicitly” on any of the Mitigating Conditions listed
under Guideline B of the Directive.  See ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2007).  
Once the government meets its burden of proving controverted facts  the burden shifts to16
an applicant to present evidence demonstrating extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances.17
Further, the government is under no duty to present evidence to disprove any Adjudicative Guideline
mitigating conditions, and an administrative judge cannot assume or infer that any particular
mitigating condition is applicable merely because the government does not present evidence to
disprove that particular mitigating condition.18
I find Applicant’s clarification and explanation of his one-time money transfer to his former
business partner and one-time money transfer to help his friend’s father credible and accordingly find
for him on this SOR allegation.  His paying his former business partner, who happened to be in
Egypt, his portion of liquidated proceeds is reasonable under the circumstances.  Also, his one-time
transfer of money to help his friend’s father to be admitted in Egypt to a hospital for a life
threatening illness is also reasonable under the circumstances.  These two self-reported transfers of
money to Egypt were one-time occurrences and are not ongoing.  
“Whole Person” Analysis 
In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as discussed
previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to the whole person concept
under Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that a Judge may find in favor of
 ISCR Case No. 02-30864 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-11448 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10,19
2004); ISCR Case No. 02-09389 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2004); ISCR Case No. 02-32006 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2004).
ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 (App. Bd.20
Dec. 11, 2003)).
See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the eighth APF21
apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006)
(sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of
clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in
foreign influence cases).  
13
an applicant where no specific mitigating conditions apply.   Moreover, “[u]nder the whole person19
concept, the administrative judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life
separately, in a piecemeal manner.  Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s security eligibility
by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances.”   The directive lists nine20
adjudicative process factors (APF) which are used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign
influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior
changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,”
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.  In addition to the21
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.    
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative
to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  In that
same decision, the Appeal Board commended the whole person analysis in ISCR Case No. 03-02878
at 3 (App. Bd. June 7, 2006), which provides:
Applicant has been in the U.S for twenty years and a naturalized citizen for
seven.  Her husband is also a naturalized citizen, and her children are U.S. citizens
by birth.  Her ties to these family members are stronger than her ties to family
members in Taiwan.  She has significant financial interests in the U.S. , and none in
Taiwan.  She testified credibly that she takes her loyalty to the U.S. very seriously
and would defend the interests of the U.S.  Her supervisors and co-worker assess her
as very loyal and trustworthy.  
There are many countervailing, positive attributes to Applicant’s life as a U.S. citizen that
weigh towards granting his clearance.  His Egyptian passport has expired and has been returned to
the issuing authority.  Applicant has formally renounced his Egyptian citizenship.  He has strong
links or connections to the United States: (1) Applicant and his wife became U.S. citizens, (2) Since
1986, for the past 21 years and Applicant’s adult life, has lived in the U.S., (3) Applicant and his
wife have four U.S. born minor children, (4) Applicant’s wife is very involved with their children’s
school activities, (4) Applicant’s mother has lived in the U.S. since 1994 as a permanent resident,
she has done everything possible to become a U.S. citizen.  Like many senior citizens, she is having
Department Counsel did not allege financial interests as a FI DC and as stated earlier, no FI MCs apply.22
However, I observe Applicant has no financial interests in Israel.  See ISCR Case No. 04-02233 at 3 (App. Bd. May 9,
2006) (stating lack of foreign financial interests do not mitigate Guideline B security concerns based on an applicant’s
relationship with relatives); ISCR Case No. 03-04300 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006), 2006 DOHA Lexis 264 at *17
(accepting the Judge’s conclusion applying FI MC 5 because that applicant’s foreign financial interests were minimal
and not sufficient to affect her security responsibilities). 
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).23
14
difficulty meeting the English literacy requirement, but has shown good faith in correcting this
shortcoming, (5) Applicant holds a responsible position for a defense contractor, (6) Applicant’s
employer holds him in the highest regard and views him as a trustworthy and critical employee, (7)
Applicant’s whole life is in the U.S.  He lives here, his immediate family is here, his four children
were born in the U.S. and are being educated in the U.S., (8) All his personal property is in the U.S.
All her financial connections are in the United States;  and (9) Applicant credibly stated that he22
would never do anything to harm the U.S., and (10) Very importantly, when Applicant had the
slightest suspicion of an improper contact by a foreign national, he immediately reported such
contact to his CEO thus establishing he knew the correct security procedures and acted accordingly.
There is no reason to believe that he would take any action which could cause potential harm
to his U.S. family or to this country.  He is patriotic, loves the United States, and would not permit
any country to exploit him.  He has close ties to the United States.  His closest family members are
his wife and four children.  They are U.S citizens and live with him.  Because his children live in the
United States, they are not vulnerable to coercion or exploitation by a foreign power.  The realistic
possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress is low.  I base this conclusion on his credible
and sincere testimony, and I do not believe he would compromise national security, or otherwise
comply with any foreign threats or coercion.  His CEO and coworker describe him as very honest,
loyal, and trustworthy.  He is an asset to his community and company.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated or overcome
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence and foreign preference.  I have no doubts
concerning Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  I take this position based on the law, as
set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the
whole person factors”  and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the23
Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under Enclosure 2 of the
Directive.  I conclude Applicant is eligible for access to classified information.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
15
Paragraph 1.  Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2.  Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Robert J. Tuider
Administrative Judge
