KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: The burden to produce evidence for mitigation is on Applicant.  Th Judge
impermissibly shifted the burden.  The Judge erred by not discussing the security threat in Iran
for which there was record evidence.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 05-03250.a1
DATE: 04/06/2007
DATE: April 6, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-03250
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 14, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and
Guideline C (Foreign Preference), pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 18, 2006, after the hearing,
Department Counsel’s does not dispute the Administrative Judge’s favorable findings for the Applicant under1
Guideline C, and they are not in issue on this appeal.
2
Administrative Judge Barry M. Sax granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department
Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Administrative
Judge’s application of Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition 1 is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law; whether the Administrative Judge’s application of Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition
5 is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law; and whether the Administrative Judge’s “whole person”
analysis is unsustainable in that it relied on whole person considerations unsupported by the record
evidence and applied them in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A. Facts
The following findings of fact are relevant to the issues in this appeal:
Applicant is a 53-year-old systems engineer for a defense contractor.  Her elderly parents
are citizens and residents of Iran and are her only ties to that country.  Her parents received “Green
Cards” in the 1980s, and have visited the U.S., but they never moved here due to health and language
concerns.  Applicant’s parents owned a home supplies store, but are now retired.  Applicant has four
sisters and a brother, all of whom emigrated to the U.S. and became U.S. citizens.  On approximately
four occasions over 33 years (coinciding with the Persian New Year, Mother’s Day or Father’s Day)
Applicant sent approximately $200.00 to her parents in Iran. Applicant calls her parents about “every
week.” The Administrative Judge concluded that Iran is clearly recognized as hostile to the United
States, which places a heavy burden on Applicant to overcome her parents’ presence in that country.
Applicant  traveled to Iran in September or October 1999 and from December 2000 to
January 2001, during periods when her security clearance was not active.  She entered and exited
Iran using an Iranian passport because she wanted to visit her parents.  She had heard that Iranian
authorities would still consider her to be an Iranian citizen, and might take away her U.S. passport,
leaving her stranded in Iran. Her Iranian passport expired in 2001.  She has renounced her Iranian
citizenship, returned the passport and she does not intend to renew it.  She is not a part of any
“Iranian community” in the U.S. and recognizes her obligation to this country and would report any
improper contact.  Her parents visited her three times in the U.S., in about 1996, 1998, and 2002 or
2003.  
Her U.S.-born husband is a partner in a pharmaceutical firm. To her knowledge, he has no
contact with any foreign government officials.  She is aware of her responsibility to report any
improper contacts.  She received a merit award from her company in March 2006.  She first obtained
a security clearance in 1990. She and her husband purchased a home in the U.S. about five years ago
for $800,000-$850,000.  She does not own any other property outside the U.S.
B. Discussion
“Foreign financial interests are minimal and not sufficient to affect the individual’s security responsibilities”2
(Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.5). 
See Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition 8 (Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.2.8) and Foreign Influence Mitigating3
Condition 5 (Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.5) respectively. 
3
The Appeal Board’s review of the Administrative Judge’s finding of facts is limited to
determining if they are supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the
record. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the
possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an
administrative agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620, 86 S. Ct. 1018, 16 L. Ed. 2d 131 (1966)). In evaluating the
Administrative Judge’s finding, we are required to give deference to the Administrative Judge’s
credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
The Administrative Judge’s findings of fact outlined above are not challenged on appeal.  To
the extent necessary to resolve the issues raised on appeal, the Administrative Judge’s findings of
fact will be discussed below in conjunction with the analysis of his conclusions. The Hearing
Transcript (HT) will be cited when appropriate.  
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions 
An Administrative Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a
satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)). The Appeal Board may reverse the Administrative Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or
revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
Our scope of review under this standard is narrow and we may not substitute our judgment for that
of the Administrative Judge. We may not set aside an Administrative Judge’s decision “that is
rational, based on consideration of the relevant factors, and within the scope of the authority
delegated to the agency . . .” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, 463 U.S. at 42.  We review matters of law
de novo.
We are not persuaded by the Department Counsel’s argument that the Administrative Judge
applied Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition 5  in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious or2
contrary to law.  The concern here is an undetermined amount that Applicant may possibly receive
as an inheritance from her parents in Iran, and the Administrative Judge concluded that the
possibility is minimal that she would receive any sum sufficient to offset her significant US assets.
The Judge may have misstated the applicable standard.  The standards are whether the foreign
financial interest could make the individual vulnerable to foreign influence, and in mitigation,
whether the interests are minimal and not sufficient to affect the individual’s security
responsibilities.   The standard is not necessarily whether the sum of the foreign assets are significant3
to offset the Applicant’s US assets.  Nevertheless, the SOR does not raise the issue of Applicant’s
possible inheritance from her parents as disqualifying conduct, and generally, it is inappropriate to
Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered for some purposes (e.g., to assess an applicant’s credibility;4
to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; or to demonstrate
rehabilitation).  Since the SOR did not raise the possible inheritance as disqualifying, mitigation is not relevant. There
is no indication of an amendment to the SOR to include the possible inheritance. 
“A determination that the immediate family member(s), (spouse, father, mother, sons, daughters, brothers,5
sisters), cohabitant, or associate(s) in question are not agents of a foreign power or in a position to be exploited by a
foreign power in a way that could force the individual to choose between loyalty to the person(s) involved and the United
States” (Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1).
“The applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidennce to rebut, explain, extenuate, or6
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by the Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion
as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision” (Directive ¶ E3.1.15). 
4
base an adverse security clearance determination on conduct not raised in the SOR.   Accordingly,4
the Judge’s errors in raising the inheritance under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition 8, or
in discussing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions associated with it, are harmless errors.  It
was appropriate for the Judge to consider the evidence of the mere expectancy of the inheritance as
evidence of the close relationship between Applicant and her parents in Iran. 
However, the Board finds that Department Counsel’s argument that the Administrative Judge
applied Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition 1  in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious and5
contrary to law, is persuasive. The Judge recognized the hostile nature of the U.S. relationship with
Iran and the heavy burden on Applicant to overcome the security significance of her parents presence
in that country.  Decision at 4.  The Judge stated that “there is no evidence one way or the other as
to whether [Applicant’s parents] are susceptible to pressure from the Iranian government . . .”
Decision at 4.  But the Judge appears to have improperly shifted the evidentiary burden back to the
government.   The Judge concluded that there is no record “evidence supporting an inference that6
Applicant would feel ‘forced’ to choose between her loyalty to [her parents] and to the United
States.” Decision at 4.  Even when a non-hostile country is involved,  the Department Counsel
should prevail when neither party presents evidence on whether Applicant’s family or associates are
in a position to be exploited in such a way that Applicant is forced to choose between his family and
his country.  As the Directive requires, the burden is on Applicant to come forward with evidence
on mitigation. 
The Administrative Judge later cited evidence (e.g., no history of security problems, security
sensitivity training, and promises to report any improper contacts) for why he found an inference that
Applicant would not be forced to choose between her parents and her country.   He also explained
that “[t]o the degree that there is a risk, it is a hypothetical one, based primarily on the undisputed
presence of [Applicant’s] parents in Iran and her warm relations with them.”     
An Administrative Judge is not required to discuss each and every piece of record evidence
in making a decision, but the Judge cannot ignore, disregard, or fail to discuss significant record
evidence that a reasonable person could expect to be taken into account in reaching a fair and
reasoned decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-19479 at 6 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 2004).  Even if there
is some record evidence that Applicant herself would resist exploitation, that does not directly
address the issue of whether the parents are in a position to be exploited by Iran in a way that could
force Applicant to choose between loyalty to them and her country.  The Administrative Judge erred
in focusing primarily on Applicant’s relationship with her parents without including a detailed
5
analysis of the security threat in Iran. That analysis is important to the outcome here.  In Foreign
Influence cases, the nature of the foreign government involved, the intelligence gathering history of
that government, and the presence of terrorist activity are important considerations that provide
context for the other record evidence and must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate
conclusions in the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08560 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 10, 2006).  The
country’s human rights record is also an important consideration.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006).  The record evidence describes Iranian’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; Iranian support and involvement in
international terrorism; Iran’s violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and not
insignificantly, Iran’s dismal human rights record. As pointed out by Department Counsel,
Applicant’s testimony underscores the official view that Iran is a hostile state that is repressive to
its own citizens and others.  Based on her experience over a 10-day period on one visit, Applicant
described Iran as a “lawless” country.  HT at 37.  Moreover, in order to visit her parents Applicant
felt constrained to obtain an Iranian passport rather than enter and exit Iran with her American
passport out of concern that Iran could confiscate her American passport and leave her stranded
there. Given the security concerns posed by the Iranian government and the situation in Iran, and
given Applicant’s very heavy burden of persuasion, it was not plausible for the Judge to conclude
that Applicant’s parents were not in a position to be exploited by a foreign power in a way that could
force the Applicant to choose between loyalty to them and the United States.  
Even if particular Adjudicative Guidelines disqualifying and mitigating conditions do not
apply to the specific facts of a case, the Judge must still evaluate an applicant’s security eligibility
under the general factors of  Directive § 6.3 and Adjudicative Process ¶ E2.2.1 (which refers to the
“whole person concept”). Any doubt as to whether access to classified information is clearly
consistent with national security must be resolved in favor of national security.  Directive  ¶ E2.2.2.
See ISCR Case No. 04-00631 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 6, 2006).  However, given the record here, the
Board concludes that such an analysis could not result in a favorable determination for Applicant.
A whole person analysis should include reasonable consideration of the situation in and nature of
the country involved.  See e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006).  As
explained in the preceding paragraph, the Administrative Judge failed to specifically analyze the
security situation in Iran so that he could compare it with the Adjudicative Process factors,
particularly the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8), in the
context of the relationship of Applicant and her parents.  The Board does not have to agree with the
totality of Department Counsel’s comments to conclude that the Judge could not have conducted a
reasonable whole person analysis here without analyzing the security situation in Iran and how it
affects Applicant and her parents.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006).
6
Order
The judgment of the Administrative Judge granting Applicant a clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
