KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: There is merit in Department Counsel argument that the Judge underestimates the
significance of terrorist operations in Lebanon.  Additionally the Board notes significant official
pronouncements regarding the situation in Lebanon since the close of the record.  Noting the
harmful error, and case law regarding official notice the Board remands the case for the Judge to
reopen the record.  Favorable decision remanded.
CASENO: 05-11292.a1
DATE: 04/12/2007
DATE: April 12, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 05-11292
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance. On November 28, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), pursuant
2
to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 27, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Barry M. Sax granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel submitted a timely appeal pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition (FIMC) 1 was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law;
whether the Judge’s application of FIMC 5 was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law; and
whether the Judge’s whole person analysis was unsupported by record evidence and was arbitrary,
capricious, and contrary to law.  We remand the case to the Judge.
Whether the Record Supports the Administrative Judge’s Factual Findings
A. Facts
 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident
of Lebanon, but holds a U.S. permanent resident card, visiting the U.S. most recently in 2005.  His
five siblings are citizens and residents of Lebanon.
Applicant’s parents-in-law have immigrated to the U.S. and hold permanent resident alien
cards.  His three brothers-in-law have received approval to immigrate to the U.S. and are awaiting
visas.  His two sisters-in-law are citizens and residents of Lebanon.
Applicant sends his mother around $500 in financial assistance every two or three months.
Applicant owns a home in Lebanon, valued at about $78,000.  Applicant travels to Lebanon every
five years or so to enable his daughters to become acquainted with his family.  Applicant possesses
only a U.S. passport.  
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 1984.  He served in the U.S. Navy from 1986 to 1990,
which included a tour of duty aboard an aircraft carrier.  After his honorable discharge, Applicant
went to work for a civilian contractor.  He has held a security clearance for over 20 years, first a
secret and subsequently a top secret.  Applicant earned an engineering degree while working for the
contractor and currently supervises 160 employees.  Applicant’s wife, born in Lebanon, became a
U.S. citizen in 1991.  She is a nurse at a V.A. hospital.  Applicant’s children are all native-born U.S.
citizens.
Applicant’s work performance has earned him numerous awards and evaluations.  Applicant
has “significant assets,” all located in the U.S. except the house in Lebanon.  His friends and
colleagues view him as “dedicated to the U.S. and U.S. security interests.”  
The Judge made no explicit finding about political tensions within Lebanon.  However, in
his Conclusions section, he stated the following: “Lebanon is not officially recognized as hostile to
the U.S., but...it does contain some terrorist and other groups that are not friendly to the U.S.”  We
treat this as a finding of fact.  See ISCR Case No. 02-20110 at n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 3, 2004) (“The
Board will treat a finding of fact [as such] regardless of where it appears in the Judge’s decision”).
B. Discussion
3
The Appeal Board’s review of the Administrative Judge’s findings of fact is limited to
determining if they are supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable
mind might accept as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in
the record.” Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the
possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an
administrative agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620-21, 86 S. Ct. 1018, 16 L. Ed. 2d 131 (1966)). In evaluating
the Administrative Judge’s finding, we are required to give deference to the Administrative Judge’s
credibility determinations. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
Department Counsel does not challenge the Judge’s findings as to Applicant’s and his
family’s citizenship and residence status.  However, in his discussion of the Judge’s application of
FIMC 1, the Department Counsel argues that the Judge underestimates the significance of terrorist
organizations operating within Lebanon.  Counsel asserts that it is error for the Judge not to “take
into consideration the substantial impact of terrorists, para-military organizations, and other extra-
governmental groups.”  
We have examined the record and conclude that there is merit in Department Counsel’s
argument.  Government Exhibit 2 contains information about terrorist organizations operating inside
Lebanon, such as Al Qaida and Hizballah.  Exhibits 3 and 4 also provide evidence as to the political
conditions in Lebanon.  The Judge’s one passing reference to these matters is an inadequate basis
for an in-depth analysis of Applicant’s case.  We conclude that the Judge’s finding on this matter
does not adequately take into account record evidence. 
Additionally, we note that, after the close of evidence in this case, the United States
government issued official pronouncements concerning the changing political situation in Lebanon
which have a direct bearing upon the issues to be resolved in this case.  Because these
pronouncements are issued in response to fluid world events independent of any personal
circumstances of Applicant, and because it is important to make accurate and timely assessments of
the political landscape in foreign countries when adjudicating Guideline B cases, the Board takes
official notice of the following:   
(1) Statement on the Situation in Lebanon, Public Papers of the Presidents (Feb. 5, 2007)
(“Syria, Iran, and Hizballah are working to destabilize Lebanese society.  Their goals are clear.  They
foment violence in order to prevent the establishment of a special tribunal in response to former
Prime Minister Hariri’s assassination, to prevent full implementation of U.N. Security Council
resolutions calling for Hizballah’s disarmament, and to bring down Lebanon’s democratically elected
Government...”); 
(2) Statement on the Government of Syria, Public Papers of the Presidents (Dec. 18, 2006)
(“Syria should disclose the fate and whereabouts of the many missing Lebanese citizens who
‘disappeared’ during the decades of Syrian military occupation.  The Syrian regime should also cease
its efforts to undermine Lebanese sovereignty by denying the Lebanese people their right to
participate in the democratic process free of foreign intimidation and interference”); 
Official notice is a broader concept than judicial notice, incorporating within its scope the subject matter1
expertise of the administrative agency.  See de la Llana-Castellon v. INS, 16 F.3d 1093, 1096 (10  Cir. 1994); McLeodth
v. INS, 802 F.2d 89, 93 (3d Cir. 1986).  Even judicial notice, however, may be taken at the appellate level.  Fed. Rule
Evid. 201, Advisory Committee Notes.  See Hope v. Pelzer, 536 U.S. 730, 737 at n.7 (2002); Directive E3.1.19 (“The
Federal Rules of Evidence . . . shall serve as a guide” in cases adjudicated under the Directive).  Federal evidentiary law
recognizes a distinction between legislative and adjudicative facts insofar as they are subjects of notice.  A legislative
fact is one which is necessary to understand a principal of law, such as the probable adverse consequences of failing to
honor the spousal privilege in criminal prosecutions.  By its nature, such a fact is not subject to evidentiary proof.  Fed.
Rule Evid. 201, Advisory Committee Notes.  Official pronouncements by the President, State Department, Department
of Defense, or other appropriate federal agency on matters of national security are equivalent to legislative facts for
purposes of DOHA adjudications in that they bind the Judge and are not subject to refutation.  See ISCR Case No. 02-
04786 at n.6 (App. B. Jun. 27, 2003)(“Official statements by the U.S. State Department concerning foreign relations of
the United States are legislative facts that can be taken into consideration by DOHA Administrative Judges or the Board
in these proceedings”); ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)(“The official positions taken by the President
of the United States and other appropriate federal officials concerning the war on terrorism are not proper subjects to
be litigated in DOHA proceedings”).  Recognizing the Supreme Court’s observation that security clearance
determinations are “an inexact science at best,” (Dept. Of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 581, 529 [1988] (internal citation
omitted), the Board acknowledges that an accurate geopolitical context is crucial in Guideline B cases.  Indeed, an
applicant’s having relatives living in a country hostile to the United States is one explicit concern cited by the Supreme
Court for denying a clearance.  Id.       
4
(3) State of the Union Address, Public Papers of the Presidents (Jan. 29, 2007) (“Hizballah
terrorists, with support from Syria and Iran, sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to
undermine Lebanon’s legitimately elected Government”); and 
(4) Travel Warning, United States Department of State (Dec. 22, 2006) (“Since the August
14 [2006] cessation of hostilities between Israel and Lebanon, political tensions in Lebanon have
increased and have become a cause for concern in recent weeks.  Hizballah maintains a strong
presence in many areas of Lebanon...”).  
The presence of immediate family members in a country which a hostile foreign power like
Syria is attempting to destabilize, and in which terrorist groups operate with a substantial degree of
autonomy, poses a real concern in the adjudication of Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
See, e.g., Executive Order 13338 (May 11, 2004), declaring a state of emergency to address, inter
alia, Syria’s interference in Lebanon; ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004).  
In Applicant’s case, we are not basing a final agency decision on matters officially noticed
at the Appeal Board level.  Rather, we are returning the case to the Judge for expansion of the record
to take into account significant changes in world events which have a direct bearing upon
Applicant’s case.  We note Cytacki v. INS, 996 F.2d 1214 (6  Cir. 1993), in which the Board ofth
Immigration Appeals upheld an immigration judge’s denial of an application for asylum in the U.S.
The Board took official notice of events in Poland which occurred after the close of the  record,
events which it concluded buttressed the decision of the immigration judge.  The Sixth Circuit
upheld the Board’s decision, stating that the Board “may take official notice of uncontroverted facts
concerning political conditions in asylum seekers’ home countries...”    1
In Applicant’s case, having already found harmful error, we rely upon Cytacki for the
proposition that decisions in Guideline B cases should be made to the greatest extent possible in the
context of current political conditions in the country at issue.  We remand the case to the Judge with
instruction that he reopen the record, allow Department Counsel an opportunity to proffer for official
5
notice matters such as those discussed above, allow Applicant an opportunity to offer evidence, and
allow the parties to reargue the case.  The other issues in the case are not ripe for consideration at
this time.
Order
The decision of the Administrative Judge denying Applicant a clearance is REMANDED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
                        
                                 Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
     Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
