KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a 36-year-old single female that incurred numerous debts that are delinquent.
When she moved from one state to another state she did not leave a forwarding address for her
creditors. Since receiving the statement of reasons, she has contacted some creditors and paid two
creditors. She failed to provide corroborating documentation on claims she set up payment plans and
that her mother was to make payments when she moved. Applicant failed to list she had delinquent
debts on her trustworthiness application. Her explanation was not credible. Applicant failed to
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by financial considerations and personal conduct.
Eligibility is denied.
CASENO: 06-07168.h1
DATE: 04/17/2007
DATE: April 17, 2007
In re:
-----------------------
SSN: ------------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-07168
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a 36-year-old single female that incurred numerous debts that are delinquent.
When she moved from one state to another state she did not leave a forwarding address for her
creditors. Since receiving the statement of reasons, she has contacted some creditors and paid two
creditors. She failed to provide corroborating documentation on claims she set up payment plans and
that her mother was to make payments when she moved. Applicant failed to list she had delinquent
debts on her trustworthiness application. Her explanation was not credible. Applicant failed to
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by financial considerations and personal conduct.
Eligibility is denied.
GE 3.1
Id.2
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue an ADP
I/II/III position for Applicant. As required by Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R (Jan.
1987), as amended (Regulation), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 ¶ E3.1.2 (Jan. 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 17, 2006
detailing the basis for its decision–concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Regulation. In a sworn statement dated October 11, 2006,
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. Applicant elected to have her case decided on the
written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s file of relevant material (FORM)
on January 23, 2007. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on January 27, 2007, and received on
February 2, 2007. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided additional information and it was received
on March 5, 2007. Department Counsel had no objections. The case was assigned to me on March
14, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 36-year-old single female who works for a medical contractor for the federal
government. Applicant listed on her Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) that prior to her
present employment, which began on November 29, 2004, she was employed steadily, with no
periods of unemployment, since January 27, 1992. In her answer to the FORM, Applicant stated she
had periods of unemployment and was forced to resign from a job due to medical issues, sometime
after July 25, 2002. She stated once she recovered from her injuries she looked for a job and was
hired on April 12, 2004. She left that employment to take the job with her present employer in
November 2004. She also listed that from October 1, 2001, until the present she lived at the same
address. Applicant stated in her answer to the FORM that when she moved from State A to State B
in May 2001, she “lived with relatives and friends for the first few years until 2004.” She now has
her own permanent residence. She listed only one residence on her SF 85P from October 2001 to the
present. 
Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1. a and claimed it is a duplicate of ¶ 1. c. The debt was
charged off in February 2000. The debt is a judgment that was filed in September 2000. She stated
she never received notice. She recently contacted the creditor and updated her current address. The
creditor originally wanted full payment and would not accept a payment plan. However, the creditor
agreed in June 2006 to accept monthly payments of $200 beginning in July. Applicant stated she
made three payments but has not provided verification of these payments.  1
SOR ¶ 1.b is a debt that Applicant stated she paid prior to leaving State A. She failed to keep
a record of her payment, claimed she recently contacted them to provide her new address and was
going to “try to work out a payment plan with them.”  No documentation was provided. 2
Id.3
Response to Form received March 5, 2007. 4
GE 3.5
The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s Response to the FORM, March 5, 2007. 6
4
SOR ¶ 1. d is a debt to retail store credit card. Applicant contacted the creditor to provide a
current address. She stated she sent money to her mother to pay the debt. She also stated she would
repay the debt within one year.  No further documentation was provided to show any payments have3
been made. This debt was charged off in February 2001. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f and 1.i are all from the same creditor and are for overdrafts and credit
card loans. These three debts were charged off in May, June and November 2001 respectively.
Applicant has contacted the creditor and stated she would have payments deducted from her pay
starting in August 2006. No proof of payments were provided. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is an account from a retail store. She stated she had paid it off, but
later found out more was owed. She settled and repaid the debt with two payments completed in
November 2006.  The debt was originally sent to collection in September 2001. It appears that this4
is the same debt as listed in SOR ¶ 1.l. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1. h, Applicant claims is the same as in ¶ 1. b, but provided no proof of
the duplication or that it is paid. Applicant admits to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j, but disputes the amount.
No proof of resolution was provided. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1. k was placed for collection in March 2006. Applicant does not
recognize the creditor. No proof of resolution was provided. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m was for
delinquent state taxes for tax year 2001. She repaid this debt.5
Applicant stated that she sent her mother, who was living in State A, money to pay some of
her creditors, after she had left the state. Applicant had periods of unemployment. She returned to
State A from approximately June 16, 2002 to July 2002, because her father died and she tended to
her mother. She did not provide any information as to what actions she took to research her debts
while she was in State A. Applicant was in a car accident on July 25, 2002, and suffered injuries that
caused her to miss work for over a year. In May 2006, her car was stolen and totaled and she incurred
the expense of towing and dumping the vehicle.  6
Applicant stated:
“I admit that I have bills, but was not aware that they were delinquent because I had
failed to update the billers with my most current address information. Therefore, my
mail had continued to go to my [State A] address, where my mother resides, since I
had no permanent address yet established in [State B] at the time. However, I did
GE 3 at p. 1.7
Response to Form received March 5, 2007. 8
Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.9
Regulation ¶ C2.1.2.10
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.11
Regulation ¶ C3.1.2.2.12
Regulation ¶C6.1.1.1.13
5
continue to send money to my mother to help pay for my bills and it never occurred
to me then that my bills continued to be outstanding.”7
Applicant also stated that she paid some bills but did not keep the documentation to substantiate her
claim. She stated that with regard to sending money to her mother she can produce her personal
checks as proof, but did not do so.  She did not provide any information from her mother that such8
an arrangement had been made and her mother took over the responsibility for paying Applicant’s
bills. In response to question 20 on her SF 85P that inquired whether Applicant had any debts that
were delinquent for more than 180 days, she answered “no.”  Many of Applicant’s debts were in a
charged off status prior to her moving. I do not find Applicant’s statements to be credible and find
she deliberately and intentionally failed to provide accurate information on her SF 85P.
POLICIES
The adjudicative guidelines set out in the Regulation are used to make ADP trustworthiness
determinations. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures
contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be made.9
An individual may not be assigned to perform sensitive duties unless a competent security
authority determines it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to do so.  Positions10
designated as ADP I or ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.  ADP III positions are11
“nonsensitive positions.”  However, DOHA has been directed to apply the due process provisions12
of the Directive for all trustworthiness determinations under ADP I, II, and including ADP III
positions by a memorandum from the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and
Security) dated November 19, 2004. Thus, even though ADP III positions are nonsensitive, they are
treated in the same way and adjudicated under the same guidelines and procedures as ADP I and II
cases. 
“The standard that must be met for … assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that …assigning
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”  Appendix13
8 of the Regulation sets forth adjudicative policy , as well as the disqualifying conditions (DC) and
Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.14
Regulation Appendix 8 at 132.15
ISCR Case No. 96-0277 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 1997).16
ISCR Case No. 97-0016 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 31, 1997); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).18
ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995); Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.21
Id.22
Id.; Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ E2.2.2.23
6
mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. Department of Defense contractor personnel are
afforded the adjudicative procedures contained in the Directive.14
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”  Each eligibility15
determination  must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material
facts and circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the factors listed in the Regulation.
Specifically these are: the nature, extend, and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; the frequency and recency of the
conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; the voluntariness of
participation; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; the
motivation for the conduct; the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition
or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should
be followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance.
The sole purpose of a security clearance determination is to decide if it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant.  The government16
has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of proof is something less than a17
preponderance of evidence.  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an18
applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance19
decision.  These same burdens of proof apply to trustworthiness determinations for ADP positions.20
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard indicates that21
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable22
doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved
in favor of protecting such sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security23
Executive Order 10865 § 7.24
7
clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an24
indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of all the evidence, I find the following adjudicative guidelines most
pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case:
Financial Considerations-a security concern exists when a person has significant delinquent
debts. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal or
unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Similarly, an individual who is
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligation to
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.
Personal Conduct-a security concern exists when conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations could indicate
that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guidelines are set forth and
discussed in the conclusions below. 
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards.
Based on all the evidence, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) 1 (a
history of not meeting financial obligations) and FC DC 3 (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
apply in this case. Applicant has accumulated delinquent debts over a significant period of time, that
she has not paid. She moved from State A in May 2001. Many of her debts were delinquent prior to
her move. Some were delinquent subsequent to her move. Most of her debts remain unpaid and
unresolved. 
I considered all the Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC), and especially
considered FC MC 1 (the behavior was not recent), FC MC 2 (it was an isolated incident), FC MC
3 (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation)), FC MC 4 (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control), and FC MC 6 (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent because most of them have not been paid or are unresolved.
Due to the number of debts they are not isolated. Therefore, FC MC 1 and 2 do not apply. 
8
Many of Applicant’s debts were charged off or put in a collection status prior to her move.
Applicant did have significant events occur in her life that were beyond her control, such as her father
passing away, a car accident that caused her injuries, unemployment, and her car being stolen.
However, these all occurred after she moved and after her debts were already delinquent. They
certainly impacted her ability to repay her debts, but the fact is she had not addressed any of the debts
prior to the SOR being issued and prior to her misfortune. She has been steadily working since
November 2004, but did not address her delinquent debts. Therefore, I find FC MC 3 does not apply.
Applicant has not provided evidence she is receiving financial counseling nor are there clear
indications that the problem is being resolved. She has paid two debts and made promises to pay
others. She claimed she was repaying or would begin repaying certain debts, but failed to provide
proof of her payments. Applicant has contacted the creditors, but there is not a clear indication that
her debts are being resolved or that she has initiated a good faith effort to repay her debts. Applicant
did not provide  documentation to show she has made payments to creditors she claimed she was
repaying or was planning on repaying. Therefore, I am unable to apply FC MC 4 or 6.
Based on all the evidence, Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) 2 (the
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations,
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness determination) applies. Appellant deliberately and intentionally falsified
her SF 85P by failing to list she had delinquent debts. It is not credible to believe that when she filled
out her trustworthiness application in December 2004, that she did not believe she had any overdue
debts. She admitted that she had bills when she left State A in May 2001, but then says she did not
know they were delinquent because she failed to provide a current address to her creditors. Her debts
were charged off in January 2000, July 2000, September 2000 (a judgment was entered), February
2001, May 2001, June 2001, and June 2006 (two accounts). The other debts were sent to collection
in November 2001 (two accounts), April 2004, and March 2006. It is not credible to believe she was
unaware of her delinquent debts. When debts are charged off it is usually after creditors have
exhausted their attempts to get the debtor to repay the debt. Those attempts would have occurred prior
to Applicant leaving the state. The fact she failed to provide a forwarding address raises issues. If she
was aware that she had debts, she also had a responsibility to provide the creditors with an address.
Applicant claims she gave her mother money to repay her debts. She obviously was in contact with
her mother during this time and had a responsibility to follow through on ensuring the debts were
repaid. She failed to provide any evidence from her mother to support an arrangement with her mother
to repay all of her debts. It is not credible to believe that Applicant left State A totally unaware that
she had any delinquent debts considering many were delinquent and in a charged off status prior to
her departure. I find Applicant was aware she had debts and they were delinquent before she moved
and deliberately failed to list them on her SF 85P. 
I have considered all of the Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) and especially
considered PC MC 2 (the falsification was an isolated incident, was not recent, and the individual
has subsequently provided correct information voluntarily), PC MC 3 (the individual made prompt,
good-faith efforts to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts), PC MC 5 (the
individual has taken positive steps to significantly reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion,
exploitation, or pressure) and find they do not apply. I find that the falsification is recent because it
has to do with her trustworthiness application. The falsification occurred on Applicant’s SF 85P.
9
However, Applicant continues to maintain she was unaware of the delinquent debts despite the
evidence. There is no evidence Appellant voluntarily provided the correct information before being
confronted with the facts. Applicant has not provided any evidence that she has taken positive steps
to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion or pressure. After considering all of the evidence, I
find that Applicant knew when she filled out the SF 85P that she had some delinquent debts and she
failed to reveal them as required. I find PC MC 1, 3 and 5 do not apply. 
The Whole Person Analysis
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount concern. The
objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense assessment of a person’s
life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance. Indeed,
the adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in considering the “whole
person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by the totality of their acts, omissions,
motivations and other variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis.
I considered all the evidence provided and also considered the “whole person” concept in
evaluating  Applicant’s trustworthiness. I considered Applicant’s periods of unemployment and steady
employment since 2004. I considered what actions she took to resolve and repay her delinquent debts
prior to the SOR and subsequent to it. She has paid two debts and apparently has an arrangement to
repay another, although she did not provide proof that she has continued to repay the debt. She
promises to repay certain others. I considered the misfortunes that have occurred in her life. I also
considered the dates of the delinquent debts and that many were years old and were not addressed
until the SOR was issued. I also considered that Applicant failed to notify her creditors that she was
moving. Applicant has provided minimum documentation to support she is repaying her debts. I find
Applicant has failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised by the financial considerations
and personal conduct concerns. Therefore, I am persuaded by the totality of the evidence in this case,
that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a favorable trustworthiness
determination. Accordingly, Guideline F and Guideline E are decided against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
10
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the interests
of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position. Eligibility
is denied.
Carol G. Ricciardello
Administrative Judge
