KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that a judge is impartial and unbiased and a party
seeking to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  The Judge’s material
findings are sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-09401.a1
DATE: 04/16/2007
DATE: April 16, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-09401
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On July 13, 2006,
DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On October 25, 2006, after considering the
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.m.1
Those favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
record, Administrative Judge Mark W. Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.   Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was prejudiced; and
whether the Judge erred by concluding the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F had not been
mitigated.
(1) Applicant makes the general argument that the Judge was prejudiced.  The Board does
not find this argument persuasive.
There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking
to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at
4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).  The issue is not whether Applicant personally believes the Judge was
biased or prejudiced against Applicant.  Rather, the issue is whether the record contains any
indication the Judge acted in a manner that would lead a reasonable person to question the fairness
and impartiality of the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04713 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003).
Bias or prejudice is not demonstrated merely because the Judge made adverse findings or reached
unfavorable conclusions.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 94-0954 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 1995).
Moreover, even if an appealing party demonstrates error by the Judge, proof of such error, standing
alone, does not demonstrate the Judge was biased or prejudiced.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0515
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 1999).  Applicant has not met her heavy burden of persuasion, in that she
fails to identify anything in the record below that indicates or suggests a basis for a reasonable person
to conclude that the Judge was prejudiced.
(2)  Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the trustworthiness concerns
raised by her history of financial difficulties had not been mitigated, because her indebtedness was
due to loss of employment and an injury, and she had stated she would pay off the debts.  Applicant
contends that the Judge mis-characterized the evidence in his findings.   The Board does not find
Applicant’s contentions persuasive.
The findings which Applicant challenges are permissible characterizations by the Judge.
Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings with respect
to her conduct of trustworthiness concern do not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of
the record evidence.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of
trustworthiness concern are sustainable.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ADP Case No. 05-03939 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept.1, 2006).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
3
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant
mitigating factors. The Judge found in Applicant’s favor with respect to seven of the SOR factual
allegations.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant had
presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s trustworthiness concerns.
The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 03-14873 at 2 (App.
Bd. Sept. 28, 2006).  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before
him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination is sustainable.  Thus, the
Administrative Judge did not err in denying Applicant access to automated information systems in
ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant access to automated information systems in
ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields  
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
