KEYWORD: Security Violations; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a theoretical researcher for a defense contractor.  In an 18 month period from
June 2002 to March 2004, she had five security violations.  The violations were mostly minor and
due to inadvertence.  Two violations involved a failure to properly spin a safe dial lock so the lock
engaged.  One violation was leaving documents unattended in a kitchen area in a secure facility.
Another violation was Applicant’s failure to set a room alarm because Applicant believed another
person was still in the room.  The other violation was a failure to properly engage a room alarm that
Applicant believed she had set.  Applicant at all times, and since the incidents, has shown a positive
attitude towards security rules and procedures.  Clearance is granted. 
CASENO: 06-01202.h1
DATE: 04/24/2007
DATE:  April 24, 2007
In Re:
-------------------
SSN: -------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-01202
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
THOMAS M. CREAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
R. David McDowell, Esq.
2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is a theoretical researcher for a defense contractor.  In an 18 month period from
June 2002 to March 2004, she had five security violations.  The violations were mostly minor and
due to inadvertence.  Two violations involved a failure to properly spin a safe dial lock so the lock
engaged.  One violation was leaving documents unattended in a kitchen area in a secure facility.
Another violation was Applicant’s failure to set a room alarm because Applicant believed another
person was still in the room.  The other violation was a failure to properly engage a room alarm that
Applicant believed she had set.  Applicant at all times, and since the incidents, has shown a positive
attitude towards security rules and procedures.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On August 30, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its decision to deny a security clearance for
Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive).  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 5, 2006.  The SOR alleges
security concerns under Guideline K (Security Violations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
the Directive.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 13, 2006.  She admitted all of the
allegations under both Guidelines with a detailed explanation.  She requested a hearing before an
administrative judge, and the request was received by DOHA on September 15, 2006.  Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed with the case on January 23, 2007, and the case was assigned to
me on January 29, 2007.  A notice of hearing was issued on February 9, 2007, and the hearing
convened on February 28, 2007.  Ten government exhibits, marked Government Exhibits 1-10, and
the testimony of one Government witness were received without objection.  Seven Applicant
exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits A-G, and the testimony of the Applicant and three Applicant
witnesses were received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 19, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
essential findings of fact.
Applicant is a 54-year-old theoretical researcher for a defense contractor.  She has a
bachelor’s degree in general mathematics, a master’s degree in mathematics topology with specialty
in theoretical applications, and a doctorate in mathematics topology with a sub-specialty in
probability and statistics from the same university.  Upon receiving her doctorate in 1980, she and
her then husband commenced working for a defense contractor on the west coast.  She was with
them for six years before she left after the birth of her daughter.  While working with that defense
contractor, she held a security clearance and worked with classified information.  She never had a
security violation.  In addition, her supervisor in that position, highly praised her for sound technical
skills and a sense of judgment that was greater than her years of experience.  He states she had no
Tr. 92-96; 90; Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated February, 6, 1998); Appellant1
Exhibit G (Letter, dated February 10, 2007).
Government Exhibit 9 (Security Acknowledgment signed by Applicant, various dates); Government Exhibit2
10 (Security briefing sign-in sheets and briefing slides, February 2003).
Tr. 28-31, 100-101.3
Tr. 13-18; Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s statement, dated February 16, 2005); Government Exhibit 34
(Administrative Inquiry, dated June 20, 2002).
Tr. 18-20, 31-33,: Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s statement, dated February 16, 2005); Government5
Exhibit 4 (Administrative Inquiry, dated January 21, 2003).
3
security violations while employed by the company.  He has seen her numerous times since she left
the company and notes her skill, demeanor, and outlook have not changed.  In 2000 after a divorce
and when her daughter was 14-years-old, Applicant rejoined the work force with a defense contractor
that was later purchased by her present employer.  Applicant now works in a different facility than
where the security violations occurred because her employer needed her specific skills at that
location.1
Between June 2002 and March 2004, Applicant committed five security rules violations.  The
procedures Applicant failed to follow were all directed or required by the National Intelligence
Security Procedures Manual (NISPOM) or by the contract awarded to her company by the
government.  The first four were considered minor violations, but the fifth was considered a major
violation.  Applicant was fully briefed on the security requirements of her company.  She attended
the briefings required for access to closed areas of the company.2
On June 18, 2002, Applicant removed documents no longer needed from her safe to return
to document control.  The document control clerk was busy so Applicant went to a kitchen area to
get a coffee or soda drink.  A co-worker entered the kitchen area and they engaged in conversation.
Applicant left the kitchen area without retrieving the documents.  About 25 minutes later, another
co-worker entered the kitchen and found the classified documents.   Applicant’s employer3
investigated the incident and determined there was no compromise of classified information since
the kitchen was in a controlled access area of the facility.  Applicant was orally counseled by her
supervisor and the facility security manager and told to be more careful in handling classified
documents.4
Applicant shared a drawer in a safe containing classified documents with a co-worker.  The
safe was located in a closed secure area of the facility.  The safe drawer had a combination lock to
secure the drawer and a handle to pull down to open the drawer.  The combination lock had to be
properly spun to lock the drawer and the handle.  A check sheet had to be signed and initialed when
unlocking and locking the combination lock and drawer.  At 1715 hours on January 20, 2003, a co-
worker checked Applicant’s safe drawer to ensure it was locked for the night.  When he pulled down
on the handle, the safe opened since the combination had not been properly secured.  Applicant was
the last person to sign the check sheet at 1345 hours.  She admitted that she inadvertently did not
ensure the combination dial was spun to lock the safe.  The safe was unsecured for approximately
3 hours and 30 minutes.  The incident was investigated by the defense contractor and it was
determined there was no compromise of classified information since the safe was located in a secure
closed area accessible only to properly cleared individuals.   On June 17, 2003, the same safe drawer5
Tr. 21-23, 31-34; Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s statement, dated February 16, 2005); Government Exhibit6
5 (Administrative Inquiry, dated June 20, 2003).
Tr. 34-37; Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s statement, dated February 16, 2005); Government Exhibit 67
(Administrative Inquiry, dated September 23, 2003; Government Exhibit 7 (Notice of Violation, dated October 10,
2003).
Tr. 43-50, 52-54; Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s statement. Dated February 16, 2005); Government8
Exhibit 8 (Administrative inquiry, dated March 19, 2004).
4
was unlocked when checked for the day at 1615 hour.  Applicant was the last person to sign for
opening or closing the drawer at 1600 hours.  The safe had been left unsecured for approximately
15 minutes.  The incident was investigated and it was determined there was no compromise of
classified documents since the safe was located in the secure closed area.  After both of these
incidents, Applicant was counseled by the company vice-president, her direct supervisor, and the 
facility security manager.  After the June 17, 2003, incident, Applicant was temporarily not permitted
to enter the secure area without an escort.6
On September 26, 2003, Applicant entered a room controlled by an alarm, a cipher lock, and
a card reader.  Approximately 50 people assigned to the area had access to the room.  When
Applicant entered the room she checked to see if anyone was in the room and located another person
working in an area not visible from all areas of the room.  The protocol was for anyone entering the
room to tell others in the room when they entered or left the room. Applicant was only in the room
a few minutes.  The other person in the room left in the meantime without informing Applicant he
was leaving.  Applicant left the room without setting the alarm because she believed the other person
was still in the room.  A third person entered the room seven minutes later and discovered the alarm
had not been set and the room was unoccupied.  Applicant admitted, and the card reader showed, that
she was the last person to leave the room with the alarm not set.  The incident was investigated and
determined there was no compromise of classified information since the card reader showed that
only cleared individuals had entered the room.  Applicant received a verbal and written reprimand
from her supervisor and the facility security manager.7
At 1710 hours on March 16, 2004, Applicant left a closed area.  The area had an alarm armed
from inside the room, and a cipher lock spin dial and a card reader access engaged from outside the
room.  Applicant signed the log as the last person to leave the room that evening.  She had a co-
worker check the cipher lock to be sure it was engaged.  When the room was entered at 0816 hours
the following day, the cipher lock was engaged but the alarm was not armed.  Procedures require the
alarm to be armed and activated and the cipher lock engaged.  Applicant remembers activating the
alarm before leaving the room.  The company conducted an inquiry and determined there was no
equipment malfunction and no compromise of classified information because the room had not been
accessed since Applicant engaged the cipher lock.  This was considered a major violation merely
because of the length of time the alarm was not engaged.  Applicant was again counseled by the
facility security manager.8
Appellant Exhibit A (List of awards and certificates, dated, January 29, 2007).9
Appellant Exhibit B (Performance Appraisals, 2000 to 2006).10
Appellant Exhibit C (messages of appreciation, various dates).11
Appellant Exhibit D (Examples of security concerns, various dates).12
Appellant Exhibit E (Memorandum, dated April 12, 2004).13
Appellant Exhibit F (Letter, dated February 7, 2007).14
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).15
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.16
5
Appellant received numerous awards during her tenure for her performance.   Her9
performance appraisals show she is among the best employees in her field.   She has received10
numerous letters of appreciation from the government program managers that she serves.   11
Appellant has been concerned about security issues and problems for her company.  She has
questioned certain practices and recommended actions to enhance security issues for the company.12
The vice-president of her company counseled her on security violations.  He felt the security
violations were caused by a lack of concentration on her part because of her busy work requirements.
He discussed with her ways to avoid future violations.  She has taken the necessary steps to minimize
the violations in the future.  He highly praised her work and her dedication.   The security manager13
of the facility where Appellant has been located since July 20, 2004, notes that there have been no
security violations by Appellant since she moved to that facility.   14
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . .
that will give that person access to such information.”   Eligibility for a security clearance is15
predicated upon the applicant meeting the security guidelines contained in the Directive.16
The Directive sets out the adjudicative guidelines for making decisions on security clearances.
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility for access
to classified information, and it lists the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions for each
guideline.  Each clearance decision must be fair, impartial, and a commonsense decision based on the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in the
Directive ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6.
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.  An administrative
judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the available, reliable
Id.17
Directive ¶¶ E2.2.1.1 through E2.2.1.9.18
See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.19
Directive ¶ E3.1.14.20
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); see Directive ¶ E3.1.15.21
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 22
ISCR Case No. 99-0597 (App. Bd. Dec 13, 2000).23
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (quoting DISCR Case No. 92-1106 (App. Bd. Oct. 7,24
1993))
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see Directive ¶ E2.2.2.25
6
information about the person.   An administrative judge should consider: (1) the nature, extent, and17
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the applicant’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation of recurrence.18
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special relationship with the
government.  The government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those
individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.  The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.   It is merely19
an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of
Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR that
disqualify or may disqualify the Applicant from being eligible for access to classified information.20
Thereafter, Applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts.   An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the21
national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”   The government is under no duty to22
present evidence to disprove any Adjudicative Guideline mitigating condition, and an Administrative
Judge cannot assume or infer that any particular mitigating condition is applicable merely because the
government does not present evidence to disprove that particular mitigating condition. “[T]he23
Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.”   “Any doubt as to whether access to24
classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved in favor of the
national security.” 25
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which
would mitigate security concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guidelines are set forth and discussed
in the conclusions section below.  Based upon a consideration of the evidence, I find the following
7
adjudicative guidelines most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case:
Guideline K - Noncompliance with security regulations raises doubts about an individual’s
trustworthiness, willingness, and ability to safeguard classified information.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct: A security concern exists for conduct involving questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations.  Any of these characteristics in a person could indicate that the person may not
properly safeguard classified information.
CONCLUSIONS
I carefully considered all of the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.  I
reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Under Guideline K (Security Violations), a security concern exists because noncompliance
with security regulations raises doubt as to an individual’s trustworthiness, and willingness and ability
to safeguard classified information.  Appellant’s five security violations raises Security Violations
Disqualifying Condition Directive ¶ E2.A11.1.2.2. (violations that are deliberate or multiple or due
to negligence).  While the violations were inadvertent and not deliberate, there were five violations
so there are multiple violations due to Applicant’s negligence.  I conclude the Security Violations
Disqualifying Condition has been established.
I considered all the Security Violations Mitigating Conditions (SV MC).  Since there were five
violations over an 18 month period, the violations were not isolated and are frequent so SV MC
Directive ¶ E2.A11.1.3.2 (Were isolated or infrequent) does not apply.  Since there is clear evidence
Applicant received proper and adequate training on security rules from her company, SV MC Directive
¶ E2.A11.1.3.3 (Were due to improper or inadequate training) does not apply.  However, the
administrative inquiries into the violations conducted by her employer and the circumstances of the
violations clearly shows that they were inadvertent so SV MC Directive ¶ E2.A11.1.3.1 (Were
inadvertent) applies.  Also, the information from Applicant’s facility security manager and Applicant’s
supervisor clearly shows that she is fully aware of security rules and is positive in applying them.  The
violations were mostly technical violations that occurred while Applicant was attempting to follow the
rules.  In two of the violations, she locked the safe but did not fully spin the locking dial to lock the
safe.  In another violation, she believed another person was still in the room since the person did not
tell her he was leaving.  She did not set the alarm believing the room was occupied.  In another
violation, she thought she set the room alarm for the night but misapplied the alarming procedures.
She did lock the room and have it double checked by another employee.  The only truly negligent act
was leaving the documents in the kitchen.  The evidence clearly shows Applicant is a positive force
in her company in examining company practices so they comply with the security rules.  She has
established and demonstrated a positive attitude towards the discharge of security responsibilities, so
SV MC Directive ¶ E2.A11.1.3.4 (Demonstrate a positive attitude towards the discharge of security
responsibilities) applies.  I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns for security
violations under Guideline K.  
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), there is a security concern for conduct that involves
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
8
regulations.  Such conduct could indicate that a person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  Applicant’s five security violations raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition
Directive ¶ E2.A5.1.2.5 (A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations).  Applicant’s conduct was not
dishonest but she did violate security rules, so the disqualifying condition is established.  The personal
conduct mitigating condition that applies to Applicant is Directive ¶ E2.A5.1.3.1 (the information was
unsubstantiated or not pertinent to a determination of judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability).
While the information substantiates the rules violations, the violations were minor, inadvertent, and
due to simple negligence by Applicant while she was attempting to comply with the security rules.
I conclude she has also mitigated the security concerns under personal conduct. 
I carefully considered all of the circumstances in light of the “whole person” concept and apply
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  Applicant’s  actions were not questionable judgment and
do not indicate untrustworthiness, unreliability or an unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations.  At all times, she was conscious of the security requirements and was attempting to
comply with them.  The violations were technical, inadvertent, and generally minor.  In fact, the record
shows she has good judgment, is trustworthy, and reliable.  She willingly follows and embraces rules
and regulations pertaining to security.  I conclude Applicant is eligible for access to classified
information.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline K: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented in the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Thomas M. Crean
9
Administrative Judge
