KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: An applicant’s need for a security clearance to his job is not material to the evaluation
of his security suitability.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-00799.a1
DATE: 04/16/2007
DATE: April 16, 2007
In Re:
--------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-00799
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 14, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 19, 2006, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Joan Caton
Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant
2
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable clearance
decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns raised by
his history of financial difficulties were mitigated because his financial problems were largely the
result of circumstances beyond his control—a period of underemployment—and he has received
counseling, established a repayment plan, begun to repay the debts, and maintained consistent
employment.  In support of his argument, Applicant essentially reargues his case with respect to the
evidence he presented below and provides additional explanations as to what efforts he has taken
to resolve his remaining outstanding debts.  Applicant also argues that an adverse clearance decision
could possibly jeopardize his current employment and his future employment possibilities.
Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
(1) An applicant’s need for a security clearance to keep his job is not material to the
evaluation of his security suitability.  The possibility that an unfavorable clearance decision could
have adverse consequences for an applicant’s job situation is not relevant or material to an evaluation
of the security significance of that applicant’s situation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-21070 at 4
(App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2004).  The security significance of Applicant’s history of financial difficulties
is not diminished or reduced by the fact that an unfavorable security clearance decision could result
in the loss of his job.
(2) The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Accordingly, we may not consider Applicant’s additional explanations, and they do not demonstrate
error on the part of the Judge.
(3) The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a
finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the financial considerations allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly
disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision he still had
significant outstanding debts and had only recently begun to repay his debts.  In light of the
3
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent, not
isolated, and still ongoing.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the
record that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F
is sustainable.  Thus, the Judge did not err in denying Applicant a clearance.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin      
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
