KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant’s statements about his state of mind are relevant evidence but not binding on
the Judge.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-07172.a1
DATE: 04/12/2007
DATE: April 12, 2007
In Re:
-------
SSN: ------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Determination
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-07172
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On May 3, 2006,
DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
2
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided on the written
record.  On September 15, 2006, after considering the record, Administrative Judge LeRoy F.
Forman denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred by concluding that
Applicant deliberately made a false statement on her Security Clearance Application; whether the
Judge’s adverse trustworthiness determination under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious or contrary
to law.
(1) Applicant argues that the Judge erred by concluding that Applicant had deliberately made
a false statement on her Security Clearance Applications.  Applicant contends that she omitted the
information about her unpaid debts because she knew the investigator would obtain a copy of her
credit report.  Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
Applicant’s statements about her intent and state of mind when he executed the document
in question were relevant evidence, but they were not binding on the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 01-19278 at 6-7 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2003). As the trier of fact, the Judge had to consider
Applicant’s statements in light of the record evidence as a whole, and Applicant’s denial of any
intent to provide false information did not preclude the Judge from weighing the record evidence and
making findings that contradicted Applicant’s denials.  Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s omission was deliberate is sustainable, and the Judge’s ultimate
unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guidelines E and J is not arbitrary, capricious or
contrary to law.
(2) The Board construes the balance of Applicant’s brief as arguing that the Judge’s adverse
trustworthiness determination under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law.  In
support of this argument, Applicant states that although she has not made any attempts to rectify her
situation at this time, she plans to make payments on her outstanding debts in the future.  Applicant’s
argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not
turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
length and seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of
relevant mitigating conditions.  He reasonably explained why the evidence which the Applicant had
presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all the government’s trustworthiness concerns.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not
3
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The determination of the Judge denying Applicant access to automated information systems
in ADP I/II/II sensitivity positions is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin      
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
