KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Financial
DIGEST: Applicant  was arrested on multiple occasions between 1980 and 2003 for assorted
offenses and convicted in connection with five of his arrests, including a 2003 felony conviction for
altering a prescription form.  Applicant’s actions represent a pattern of criminal conduct for which
too little time has elapsed to mitigate security concerns.  Additional security concerns are raised by
Applicant’s  history of delinquent debts, which he accumulated prior to his current marriage in 2005.
Applicant has not addressed his debts to date and has no plans to do so while his job status remains
uncertain.  Based on his debt accumulations and lack of tangible progress in addressing them, he fails
to  mitigate financial concerns.  Clearance is denied. 
CASENO: 06-18762.h1
DATE: 04/30/2007
DATE:  April 30, 2007
In re:
---------------------
SSN: -------------    
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-18762
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Rita O’Brien,
 Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies 2
SYNOPSIS
Applicant  was arrested on multiple occasions between 1980 and 2003 for assorted offenses
and convicted in connection with five of his arrests, including a 2003 felony conviction for altering
a prescription form.  Applicant’s actions represent a pattern of criminal conduct for which too little
time has elapsed to mitigate security concerns.  Additional security concerns are raised by
Applicant’s  history of delinquent debts, which he accumulated prior to his current marriage in 2005.
Applicant has not addressed his debts to date and has no plans to do so while his job status remains
uncertain.  Based on his debt accumulations and lack of tangible progress in addressing them, he fails
to  mitigate financial concerns.  Clearance is denied. 
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On September 28, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 20, 2006, and requested a hearing.  The case
was assigned to me on February 5, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on March 27, 2007.  The
hearing was rescheduled for April 3, 2007.  A hearing was April 3, 2007, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of five
exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and seven exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was
received on April 11, 2007.
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to keep the record open to permit
him the opportunity to supplement the record with payment information regarding one of his
creditors.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record.  The
Government, in turn was allowed three days to respond.  Applicant did not supplement the record.
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested on multiple occasions between
July 1980 and February 2003 for assorted charges, and convicted in connection with three of the
charged offenses.  Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated eight delinquent
debts in excess of $11,000.00.
3
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged debts, with explanations.
He denied only his being arrested in April 2001 for discharging a firearm in city limits.
STATEMENT OF FACTS
Applicant is a 44 year-old computer operator for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant was first married in 1981.   He divorced his first wife (W1) in January 1986, and
married his second wife (W2) in June 1989 (see ex. 1).  His second marriage lasted four years.
Following their divorce in January 1993, he married for the third time in May 1994 to W3.
Applicant and W3 dissolved their marriage in February 2002.  He has no children from any of his
first three marriage (R.T., at 49), but has a daughter (age 20) from another woman (born in 1986);
he pays no current child support for this daughter (R.T., at 49).  Applicant married his current wife
(W4) in November 2005.  She has two children from another marriage, who reside with  her and
Applicant.  Applicant is the sole source of income for his family (R.T., at 44); albeit WR receives
child support from one of the children’s father in the amount of $300.00 a month (R.T., at 49-50).
Applicant’s arrest record
Between 1980 and 1990, Applicant was twice arrested: once in July 1980 (while 17 years of
age) for receiving stolen things and again in April 1990 for driving under the influence (DuI).
Charges were dropped on the receiving stolen things charges (involving a watch which he pawned
for his girlfriend at the time).
Over the course of the ensuing 10 years, Applicant was able to avoid any problems with law
enforcement authorities.  However, in April 1990, he was arrested and charged with DuI.  He
pleaded guilty and was placed on one year of probation.  
In October 1997, Applicant was arrested for DuI and possession of a controlled substance
(less than 2 to 8 grams).  He pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of DuI and the possession charge was
dropped (R.T., at 40-41, 65-66).  He was then sentenced to two years probation and fined $1,000.00.
When he was arrested again for DuI in February 1999, his probation was revoked, and he was
required to serve his full 90 days in jail (R.T., at 69-79).  Applicant actually served just 45 days of
his 90-day sentence.  Initially, Applicant attributed his probation revocation to a drug test he failed
at work (R.T., at 80), before acknowledging that it was his February 1999 DuI offense that resulted
in his probation revocation.
In May 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with aggravated assault with a deadly
weapon.  Claiming the incident did not happen as W3 reported the incident, he contested the charges.
When W3 determined not to press the charges, they were dismissed (R.T., at 39-40).  Applicant
admits, though, to brandishing a loaded gun in the presence of his wife during a heated argument
with her (R.T., at 66-68).
4
Applicant was charged with discharging a firearm in the city in April 2001.  Applicant
assures he was unloading a 9 mm handgun in his home when the pistol accidentally discharged
(R.T., at 42-43).  He was subsequently found guilty and fined $150.00.  Applicant no longer owns
the pistol, or any other  handguns (R.T., at 81).  On the day following his firearm arrest, Applicant
was arrested again: this time  for alleged telephone harassment following a heated argument he had
with his brother.  After Applicant spent the first 72 hours following his arrest in jail, his brother
dropped the charges, and the charges were dismissed (R.T., at 42).  No inferences of wrongdoing dan
be drawn against Appellant based just on his reported exchange with his brother and his brother’s
filing a report with the police.
In February 2003, Applicant pleaded guilty to obtaining prescription drugs by fraud (by
altering a prescription for 15 codeine pills to 75 pills).  The court accepted Applicant’s guilty plea
and entered a conviction for the offense (a felony).  At his sentencing hearing in September 2003,
the court sentenced him to three years probation.  He received a first offender pardon covering this
conviction in September 2006 upon his documented showing he completed his probation conditions
(ex. E).  His pardon does not include the right to receive, possess or transport a firearm, or constitute
a waiver of any unpaid fines and fees, due and owing.  However, there do not appear to be any
unpaid fines or fees.
Both in court and at this hearing, Appellant accepted responsibility for his 2003 conviction
for altering a  prescription form.  Both in his 2004 security clearance application (SF-86) and answer
he attributed the actual alteration to a friend, while he accepted responsibility for it in court (see ex.
1).  He did not mention his conviction or probation, however, in his answers to questions 21 and 24
Both in his answer and hearing testimony, he acknowledged both.  He also identified the friend who
altered his prescription form in his hearing testimony (on the assumption confidentiality) as W4
(R.T., at 89-91).  W4 did not testify at either proceeding and has never publicly acknowledged
responsibility for the offense.
While Applicant appears sincere in his assigning the actual altering of the prescription form
to W4, he provides no oral or written corroboration from W4.  Conceivably, this information might
provide cause for reopening the case concerning his February 2003 offense.  Collateral estoppel
principles do not enable an ancillary body like this one, though, to undo Applicant’s guilty
conviction.  At most, his testimony might warrant some extenuation consideration.  Both raised
concerns about his initial credibility on his account of his 2003 conviction and probation (associated
with his failure to acknowledge his probation status in his 2004 SF-86) and the absence of oral or
written corroboration from W4 preclude acceptance of his attribution claims based solely on his
statements.  
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of consumer-related debts before consummating his
marriage to W4 in November 2005. He attributed his financial problems to periodic periods of
unemployment over a number of years spanning 1997 and 2003 (R.T., at 56).   Altogether, Applicant
accumulated eight debts, exceeding $11,000.00, which he permitted to become delinquent.  He
claims to have satisfied one of these debts (his debt to creditor 1.d), but provides no documentation.
He disputes his creditor 1.g debt, too: He claims this debt represents a deficiency on his vehicle that
was repossessed in 2001.  This repossession deficiency is listed in his 2005 credit report (ex. 5).
5
While he claims the repossessed vehicle was almost paid for and should have brought more than the
amount owing at public sale of the vehicle (R.T., at 60-61, 92-93), he provides no evidence of any
follow-up clarification demands from the creditor after obtaining his creditor report.  Nor does he
provide any documented information about his identity theft claims (see ex. F).
In his 2004 SF-86, Applicant committed to contact his creditors and try to make
arrangements to correct his outstanding debts (see ex. 1).  To date, though, he has neither paid nor
contacted any of the other seven creditors (R.T., at 54, 63-64) and doesn’t know when he will be able
to do so (given the uncertainty of his current job status).  He has received no financial counseling
and has no identified plan to repay any of his remaining creditors at this time.
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors and colleagues and documents excellent
performance evaluations (see exs. A and D).  He has received several certificates of training and
appreciation (exs. B and C), as well as some very positive customer responses for the services he has
delivered in behalf of his employer (see ex. G).  
POLICIES
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
"Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying
Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge
to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply
with laws, rules and regulations.
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead
6
to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do
so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires Administrative
Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.
Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s] alleged
in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a material bearing
to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The required showing of
material bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the
applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
security clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing his
or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a meritorious computer operator who has been involved in a number of
criminally-related incidents between 1980 and 2003, five of which resulted in convictions for assorted
offenses (DuI, discharging a firearm and most recently, altering a drug prescription form, a felony).
Security concerns are also raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts: specifically, eight debts
that exceed $11,000.00 in the aggregate.  Unable to address his debt delinquencies heretofore,
Applicant does not know when he will be able to pay on his debts. 
Criminal conduct issues
Following his 1980 arrest for receiving stolen things, Applicant avoided any confrontations
with law enforcement for almost a decade.  This all changed in October 1997 when he was arrested
and convicted of DuI.  He experienced five additional arrests between October 1997 and February
2003.  Four of these arrests resulted in convictions (i.e., his 1997 and 1999 DuI arrests, his 2001
discharging a firearm arrest, and his 2003 obtaining medication by false pretenses arrest.  While the
charges relating to his May 1998 aggravated assault arrest were dismissed, Applicant admits to
brandishing the weapon in from of the W3.  As a result, some criminal conduct on Applicant’s part
7
is evidenced.  No inferences of criminal conduct are associated with his 2001 firearm arrest, which
also resulted in dismissed charges.   
Applicant’s reported criminal offenses (six supported by convictions)  warrant the application
of two disqualifying conditions of the  Adjudicative Guidelines for criminal conduct: DC a (A single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), DC c (Allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged) and DC e (Violation of parole or probation,
or failure to complete a court-mandated  rehabilitation program).  Applicant’s 1990 DuI arrest and
1980 receiving stolen things arrest are separated by almost two years, as Applicant correctly claims.
His most recent arrests reflect a considerable pattern of illicit activity, however, beginning with his
1997 DuI arrest/conviction and culminating 16 years later with his arrest/conviction for receiving
medication by false prescription. 
Collateral estoppel principles preclude any reconsideration of Applicant’s 2003 conviction
in light of his hearing claims attributing the altering of the prescription drug form at issue to his wife.
Our Appeal Board has consistently held that an applicant is estopped from contending that he or she
did not engage in the criminal acts for which he or she was convicted.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-
0116 (May 1, 2000), at p. 2; ISCR Case No. 96-0587 (March 24, 1997), at p. 2; ISCR Case No. 95-
0817 (February 21, 1997, at p. 3.  Collateral estoppel applies to a criminal conviction whether the
conviction is based on a verdict after trial or is based on a guilty plea (as here).  See ISCR Case No.
94-1213 (June 7, 1996), at p.3.  Due process observed in the courts and in DOHA hearings simply
does not permit an applicant the right to relitigate matters that have been adjudicated in a prior due
process proceeding.  See, e.g., Montana v. United States, 440 U.S. 147, 153-54 (1979).  While
Applicant might find sufficient cause to warrant reopening of his case with evidence of another’s
culpability, our jurisdiction does not permit passing judgment on the proceedings and decisions in
criminal cases conducted by Federal and state courts.  
To be fair, Applicant’s belated attribution of the prescription alteration underlying his 2003
conviction could merit some extenuation.  However, Applicant declined to develop the facts in any
further detail out of respect for his wife.  This is very understandable.  Absent any more details of her
involvement and corroboration from W4 herself in the face of some raised challenges to his own
credibility associated with his failure to mention his probation status in his completed security
clearance application, no meaningful extenuating value may be assigned to Applicant’s attribution
of responsibility to W4.  
Among the eight criminal offenses Applicant was cited for over a 23-year period, he was
convicted on six occasions.  Two of the cases were dismissed based on complaining witnesses
declining to prosecute; of these two cases, only one is free of any Applicant culpability. The pattern
of criminal conduct reflected in his string of arrests spanning 23 years is significant and is still
relatively recent.  The first offender pardon he received in 2006 recites his completion of his probation
terms and is probative of his efforts to comply with the conditions set by the court.   Besides meeting
his probation conditions, he has also exhibited commendable efforts in caring for his family and
fulfilling his professional responsibilities.   These efforts reflect positively on his character.  
Still, Applicant’s actions and efforts to date are insufficient to warrant the application of any
of the mitigation conditions at this time.  For Applicant’s cited conduct was neither aged nor isolated.
And his restorative efforts, while commendable and encouraging, are still not sufficient at this time
8
to warrant conclusions of clear evidence of successful rehabilitation.   Taking  into account all of the
facts and circumstances developed in the record, unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c through 1.h of the SOR.  Sub-paragraph 1.b warrants
favorable conclusions.
Financial issues
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual appellant is so financially overextended as to indicate
poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which can
raise questions about an the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Appellant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his failure to document payments on any of his
listed debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for
financial considerations: DC a (Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and DC c (A history of not
meeting financial obligations).
 Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to periods of unemployment.  Since commencing
his current employment in 2004, however, he has made little tangible headway in addressing his
identified delinquent debts.  His debt accumulations are cumulative, factually undisputed, and still
unresolved.  His current wife’s health problems, while difficult for him to cope with, were not
causally linked to the debt delinquencies that accrued before their marriage.  Finally, Applicant has
not taken advantage of any counseling and consolidation program to assist him in resolving his debts.
So, while his debts are partially extenuated by his employment circumstances and entitle to some
benefit from MC b (The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or
a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances),  his
subsequent failures to responsibly address his debts and seek counseling precluded him from taking
advantage of any of the other mitigating conditions of the financial considerations guideline. 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities,
among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.   Financial stability in a person cleared
to access classified information is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of
the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties
is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases
(as here) and bring into play security concerns covered by both the financial consideration and
personal conduct guidelines.  
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt
accumulations and minimal documented steps he has taken to resolve them, Applicant fails to
mitigate security concerns related to his longstanding debt delinquencies and judgment lapses
associated therein.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by sub-
paragraphs 2.a through 2.h of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including each of the E
2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
9
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the context of the
FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS, CONDITIONS, and the factors listed above, this
Administrative Judge makes the following FORMAL FINDINGS:
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.h: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.f: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.g: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.h: AGAINST APPLICANT
 DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.   Clearance is denied.
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
10
