KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Personal Conduct; Financial 
DIGEST: Applicant has a history of criminal activity and a history of failing to meet his financial
obligations. As of the date of his hearing, he had 12 accounts, owing approximately $22,300, that
have been delinquent for many years. His evidence is insufficient to show he has a track record of
financial responsibility. Furthermore, he deliberately falsified his security clearance application.
Clearance is denied. 
CASENO: 06-17494.h1
DATE: 04/30/2007
DATE:  April 30, 2007
In re:
----------------------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-17494
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
JUAN J. RIVERA
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline F. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant has a history of criminal activity and a history of failing to meet his financial
obligations. As of the date of his hearing, he had 12 accounts, owing approximately $22,300, that
have been delinquent for many years. His evidence is insufficient to show he has a track record of
financial responsibility. Furthermore, he deliberately falsified his security clearance application.
Clearance is denied. 
  (*) Concerning his last name change, Applicant explained his mother changed his last name when he was three1
years old and he used that name for many years. He changed his last name back to his father’s last name when he became
an adult.
  GE 1 (Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated November 1, 2005.2
  See Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960, as amended,3
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Jan.
2, 1992) (Directive), as amended.
  AE 2 was submitted post-hearing. I left the record open to allow Applicant time to submit additional4
information. AE 2 includes a government memorandum indicating Department Counsel did not object to the exhibit.
  On August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) (USDI) published a memorandum5
directing application of the revised adjudicative guidelines (Guidelines) to all adjudications and other determinations
made under the Directive in which a statement of reasons has not been issued by September 1, 2006. (emphasis added)
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On November 1, 2005, Applicant  submitted a security clearance application.  On August1 2
17, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR informed Applicant that, based on information available
to the Government, DOHA adjudicators could not make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information and
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a security determination.  On3
September 3, 2006, November 2, 2006 (notarized), and December 4, 2006 (notarized), Applicant
submitted answers to the SOR and requested a hearing.
On February 15, 2007, the government moved to amend the SOR and provided Applicant
with 30 days to object to the government’s motion and to answer the SOR. The amended SOR added
one Guideline E allegation, and alleged additional security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). Applicant answered the amended SOR on March 18, 2007. He did not object to the
government’s motion to amend the SOR in his answer to the SOR, or at the hearing. I granted the
motion.
The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2007. On March 27, 2007, I convened a hearing
at which the government presented four exhibits, marked GE 1-4, to support the SOR. Applicant
testified on his own behalf, and presented two exhibits, marked AE 1-2,  which were admitted4
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 11, 2007.
PROCEDURAL ISSUE
Because Applicant’s SOR was issued prior to the effective date of the revised adjudicative
guidelines, I applied the provisions of the Directive (old Guidelines) to Applicant’s case.5
FINDINGS OF FACT
4
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except those contained in ¶¶ 2.a through 2.d, with
explanations. I considered SOR ¶¶ 2.a - 2.d, denied, because he denied doing so with the deliberate
intent to mislead the government. His admissions and explanations are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s testimony, and the evidence, I make
the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is a 45-year-old security guard working for a defense contractor. He graduated
from high school in June 1989. He has no military service. Applicant has never been married. He
has a 15-year-old daughter for whom he provides support. He has worked for his current employer,
and has held an interim security clearance at the secret level since February 2004.
In his November 2005 security clearance application, Applicant answered “No” to question
23a (asking whether he had ever been charged with of convicted or any felony offense); question 23d
(asking whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related to alcohol or
drugs); question 23f (asking whether in the last seven years he had been arrested for, charged with,
of convicted of any offense otherwise not disclosed); question 28a (asking whether in the last seven
years he had been over 180 days delinquent on any debt); and question 28b (asking whether he was
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt). 
The subsequent background investigation revealed that between 1980 and 2004, he had been
arrested and charged with the offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶1.a through 1.f. Concerning the allegation
in ¶ 1.a, Applicant explained that in 1980, he served as a lookout for a friend who was stealing a
car’s license tags. He was charged with theft over $500, a felony, and theft over $300. He was found
guilty of a lesser offense and sentenced to serve community service. (Tr. 72-73) He was
approximately 20 years old at the time of the offense.
In 1981, Applicant and a friend were arrested while in possession of stolen property.
Applicant was charged with receiving stolen property. (SOR allegation ¶ 1.b) Concerning SOR ¶ 1.c,
he explained he was moving his household goods in a pick up truck when he was stopped by the
police. During the ensuing search of his person and vehicle, the policemen found a pellet pistol, the
remains of a marijuana cigarette, and a knife. He was charged with carrying a pistol without a
license, a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, and carrying a dangerous weapon
(knife). Applicant testified he pled guilty to the weapon and knife charges and was sentenced to serve
six months of supervised probation. (Tr. 79-80)
Regarding the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, he explained that, while drunk, he confused his car
with another person’s car and was arrested while attempting to change a tire. He was using his own
jack and iron head to change the tire. He was charged with possession of burglary tools and
attempted larceny. The charges were latter dismissed. (Tr. 80-81) In 1994, Applicant was stopped
by the police and the ensuing search revealed a “dime bag of weed” (marijuana) he had purchased
through a friend for his own use. He was charged with misdemeanor possession of marijuana. (SOR
¶ 1.e) He was sentenced to perform 40 hours of community service. (Tr. 83-85) Applicant testified
that when he was 32 to 33 years old, he smoked marijuana at least every other day. He stopped using
marijuana in 1995. (Tr. 86) In 2004, Applicant was involved in an altercation with his then
girlfriend, and was charged with simple assault. (SOR ¶ 1.f) The charge was later dismissed.
  GE 2 (Credit report, dated January 2007), and GE 3 (Credit report, dated December 2005).6
5
The background investigation also revealed Applicant has 12 delinquent/charged off debts,
owing approximately $22,300. The debts became delinquent and were assigned to collection between
February 2002 and May 2005.  Applicant admitted these were his debts. He presented little or no6
evidence to explain why the alleged debts became delinquent, what efforts, if any, he has taken to
pay, settle, or resolve the debts, whether he has been making payment on other debts, or whether he
has taken any measures to avoid future financial problems.
Applicant has been consistently employed as a security guard for the last 10 years. In October
2006, he began working a second job as a security guard seeking a better paying job. In February
2006, he was interviewed by a government background investigator, and was confronted about his
delinquent obligations. Applicant took no action to pay, settle, or resolve his delinquencies from
February 2006 to the day of his hearing. He claimed he has no money left at the end of the month
and could not afford paying his old delinquent debts and his current debts and living expenses. (Tr.
101, 120) When asked why/how he had accumulated so many small debts, Applicant explained he
was lazy and did not pay his debts on time. (Tr. 113) He testified he has been using whatever money
he has left over at the end of the month to fix his apartment, and to purchase new furniture and other
goods. (Tr. 121)
Applicant has a 15 year-old-daughter. He started making court ordered child support
payments for his daughter around 2002 when she was age 10. According to Applicant’s state’s Child
Support Services obligation summary, dated March 14, 2007, he is $19,369 in arrearage.
During his 2006 interview, Applicant was also confronted with some of his past criminal
behavior. He admitted to the investigator that he was charged with assault in 2004 and possession
of burglary tools in 1993. Applicant was then asked whether he had been arrested, charged with, or
convicted of any other offenses. He told the investigator “No,” and deliberately failed to disclose the
incidents alleged under SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c, and 1.e. 
Applicant provided several explanations for his failure to disclose his past criminal behavior,
i.e., he believed the 20-year-old charges would not show up in the background investigation or the
government would not investigate that far back (Tr. 62-63); he did not understand the question (Tr.
16); since some of the charges were dropped, he believe he did not have to disclose the arrest or
charges; prior to completing his security clearance application, he looked at his records and believed
it would have been very difficult for the government to find out about his old criminal records. (Tr.
63)
Applicant knew he was required to be candid and forthright in his answers to the security
clearance application. (Tr. 97) He expressed remorse for deliberately falsifying the security clearance
application, and stated he had learned his lesson. He promised never to lie again about his past
behavior in any other application. He explained his current job is the best job he has ever had and
did not want to loose it. He falsified his application because he was afraid that if he disclosed his past
criminal behavior he would loose his interim security clearance and his job. (Tr. 92) 
  Directive ¶ 6.3. Each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial common sense determination based upon7
consideration of all the relevant and material information and the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in enclosure
2.
  Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “. . . The adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as8
the whole person concept. Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable,
should be considered in reaching a determination. . . .” The whole person concept includes the consideration of the nature
and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances; the frequency and recency of the conduct; the age of the
applicant; the motivation of the applicant, and the extent to which the conduct was negligent, willful, voluntary, or
undertaken with knowledge of the consequences involved; the absence or presence of rehabilitation; and the probability
that the circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future. 
  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).9
6
Concerning his failure to disclose his delinquent debts, Applicant explained he did not know
it was important for him to disclose his delinquent debts, or that they would be a concern for the
government. He believed he could resolve his financial problems on his own, and elected not to
disclose the information. 
Applicant considers himself to be reliable, dependable, and a hard worker. There is no
evidence he has mishandled or caused the compromise of classified information while employed by
a defense contractor. He was adamant about how much he loves his job, and his desire to receive a
security clearance to be able to continue working as a security guard. 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines which must be considered in evaluating an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Foremost are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each adjudicative guideline applicable to the facts and circumstances
of the case. However, the guidelines are not viewed as inflexible ironclad rules of law. The presence
or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or
against an Applicant. Each decision must also reflect a fair and impartial common sense
consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3 of the Directive,  and the whole person concept.7 8
Having considered the record evidence as a whole, I conclude Guideline J (Criminal Conduct),
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) are the applicable
relevant adjudicative guidelines.
BURDEN OF PROOF
The purpose of a security clearance decision is to determine whether it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship9
with the government based on trust and confidence. The government, therefore, has a compelling
interest to ensure each applicant possesses the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness
of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. 
  ISCR Case No. 98-0761 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 27, 1999)(Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less10
than a preponderance of the evidence.); ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 3, 2006)(Substantial evidence is
such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the record.); Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
  Egan, 484 U.S. 518, at 528, 531.11
  See, id.; Directive ¶ E2.2.2.12
  Directive, ¶ E2.A10.1.1.13
  Directive, ¶ E2.A10.1.2.1.14
  Directive, ¶ E2.A10.1.2.2. 15
7
The government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in the SOR. To
meet its burden, the government must establish by substantial evidence  a prima facie case that it10
is not clearly consistent with the national interest for the applicant to have access to classified
information. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant carries a heavy
burden of persuasion.  The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels11
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of protecting national security.12
CONCLUSIONS
Under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), a history or pattern of criminal conduct is a security
concern because it may indicate an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations and may show the
applicant to be lacking in judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  The government established its13
case under Guideline J by showing that Applicant was implicated in six offenses between 1980 and
2004. He was convicted in 1980 for theft, in 1988 for carrying a dangerous weapon (knife), and in
1993 for misdemeanor attempted larceny. I also find, as discussed below under Guideline E, that
Applicant deliberately falsified his 2005 security clearance application and deliberately made a false
statement to a government investigator. His falsification of the SF 86, and his false statement are
violations of 18 U.S.C. 1001, a felony. Disqualifying Condition (DC) 1: Allegations or admission of
criminal conduct,  and DC 2: A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses  apply.14 15
Applicant’s past behavior, from 1980 to 2006, forms a pattern of criminal activity. His
falsification brings to the forefront the criminal conduct and financial considerations concerns raised
by his past behavior. Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s criminal behavior is
recent and not isolated. Applicant has engaged in criminal misconduct over a period of at least 26
years, from the time he was 18 until age 44. Applicant’s last two incidents of criminal misconduct
are his falsification of the security clearance application in 2005, and his false statement to the
government investigator in 2006. Considering his history of criminal behavior, the nature and
seriousness of his misconduct, his falsification of the SF 86, his false statement, and his disregard for
the law, I decide Guideline J against Applicant. His behavior raises questions about his ability and
willingness to follow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified information.
  Directive, ¶ E2.A6.1.1.16
  Directive, ¶ E2.A5.1.1.17
8
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), a security concern exists when a person has
significant unpaid debts. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk to engage in illegal
or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations.  Similarly, an individual who is16
financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his/her obligation to
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life can often
indicate how a person may behave in other aspects of life.
Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations dating back to the early
2000s. He accumulated approximately $22,300 in 12 debts resulting from his abuse of his credit and
his lack of financial responsibility. Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) 1: A
history of not meeting financial obligations; and FC DC 3: Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,
apply in this case. 
I considered all Guideline F Mitigating Conditions (MC) and I conclude none apply. He
presented little or no evidence to explain why the alleged debts became delinquent, what efforts, if
any, he has taken to pay, settle, or resolve the debts, whether he has been making payment on other
debts, or whether he has taken any measures to avoid future financial problems. The evidence shows
Applicant ignored his delinquent debts and took little or no action to pay or resolve his debts.
Although he has been consistently employed during the last 10 years, he presented no evidence of
circumstances beyond his control that would have prevented him from paying his debts. On balance,
and after careful consideration of all information, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he
has dealt responsibly with his financial obligations. His financial history and lack of favorable
evidence preclude a finding that he has established a track record of financial responsibility. Guideline
F is decided against Applicant.
Under Guideline E, personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks the ultimate
question – whether a person’s past conduct instills confidence the person can be trusted to properly
safeguard classified information. An applicant's conduct is a security concern if it involves
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations. Such behavior could indicate that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.17
The government established, and Applicant admitted, that he deliberately failed to disclose
his past criminal behavior in his response to questions 23.a, 23.d, and 23.f of his security clearance
application, and that he made a false statement to a government investigator. He deliberately
falsified his security clearance application, and deliberately made a false statement, because he was
afraid that disclosing his past criminal behavior would adversely affect his ability to obtain a
security clearance and he would lose his job. I am also convinced that Applicant deliberately failed
to disclose his delinquent debts in his response to question 28. Numerous factors weighed in my
analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant’s age, his employment history, his demeanor
and testimony, the number and value of the debts, his long term disregard of the debts, and his
deliberate falsification of other answers in the application. I also considered the same reasons
previously outlined under the Guideline J and Guideline F discussions, incorporated herein.
9
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) E2.A5.1.2.2: the deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities, applies.
I specifically considered all Guideline E Mitigating Conditions and conclude that none
apply. Considering that the falsification occurred in 2005, and he made his false statement in 2006,
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to support the applicability of any of the mitigating
conditions. Additionally, for the same reasons outlined above under the discussion of Guidelines
J and F, incorporated herein, I conclude Applicant’s behavior shows questionable judgment, lack
of reliability, and untrustworthiness. Guideline E is decided against Applicant.
I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and mitigating
conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines. I applied the whole person
concept. I specifically considered Applicant’s maturity and his years of good performance working
for a defense contractor. Considering the totality of Applicant’s circumstances, Applicant
demonstrated a lack in judgment and trustworthiness in the handling of his financial affairs.
Moreover, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the overall judgment, honesty,
and trustworthiness security concerns raised by his falsifications.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings regarding each SOR allegation as required by Directive Section E3.1.25 are
as follows:
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct (Guideline J) AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct (Guideline E) AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Financial Considerations (Guideline F) AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l Against Applicant
10
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Juan J. Rivera
Administrative Judge
