KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct; Alcohol
DIGEST: The Applicant had a serious alcohol abuse problem for many years, which eventually
resulted in his being arrested for driving under the influence three times between 1992 and 2003.
After the last arrest, the Applicant admitted that he was an alcoholic, totally abstained from alcohol
for almost four years, attended alcohol treatment, established a church-based support network, and
evinces a credible intent not to use alcohol in the future.  Adverse inference is overcome.  Clearance
is granted.
CASENO: 06-18966.h1
DATE: 04/17/2007
DATE: April 17, 2007
In Re:
--------------------------
SSN: ----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-18966
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
WILFORD H. ROSS
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Thomas M. Abbott, Esquire
 McKenna, Long & Aldridge
SYNOPSIS
2
The Applicant had a serious alcohol abuse problem for many years, which eventually resulted
in his being arrested for driving under the influence three times between 1992 and 2003.  After the
last arrest, the Applicant admitted that he was an alcoholic, totally abstained from alcohol for almost
four years, attended alcohol treatment, established a church-based support network, and evinces a
credible intent not to use alcohol in the future.  Adverse inference is overcome.  Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On December 8, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied
or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on January 8, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 5, 2007.  The case was received
by the undersigned on February 8, 2007, and a Notice of Hearing was issued on February 16, 2007.
A hearing was held on March 13, 2007, at which the Government presented nine
documentary exhibits (Government Exhibits 1 through 9).  Testimony was taken from the Applicant,
who also submitted 24 exhibits (Applicant’s Exhibits A through X).  The transcript was received on
March 23, 2007. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 51, married and has a Bachelor of Science degree.  He is employed by a
defense contractor, and he seeks to retain a Top Secret-level DoD security clearance previously
granted in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a continued security clearance, based
upon the allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings of fact are
entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR.  They are based on the Applicant's Answer
to the SOR, the exhibits and the live testimony.  The Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations
in the SOR.  Those admissions are hereby deemed findings of fact.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal conduct).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has engaged in criminal acts.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline G - Alcohol consumption).  The Government alleges in this paragraph that
the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he uses intoxicants to excess.
3
The Applicant has had a serious alcohol abuse problem for many years.  He began drinking
alcohol in about 1969.  The usage increased over time and eventually resulted in the Applicant being
arrested three times for alcohol related driving offenses.  The last arrest occurred in July 2003.  The
Applicant has been abstinent since the last arrest.  (Transcript at 23-27.)
The first arrest occurred on April 23, 1992.  The Applicant was involved in a serious
automobile accident, which resulted in his being injured.  The Applicant was not the direct cause of
the accident, but the Highway Patrol report states that his drinking may have contributed to it.
(Government Exhibit 8 at 26.)  The Applicant had been drinking before the accident, but refused to
take any alcohol tests.  While the Highway Patrolman felt that the Applicant was under the influence,
it is impossible to know the level, if any, of his intoxication.  He was charged with Driving Under
the Influence of Alcohol (DUI) and Reckless Driving.  He plead Nolo Contendere to Reckless
Driving and was sentenced to a fine and three years probation.  He also was ordered not to drink and
drive.  This last requirement he failed to follow during his probation.(Transcript at 27-29.)
As a result of the above arrest, the Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended for a period
of time.  In 1995, the Applicant was stopped by police and charged with Speeding/Reckless Driving,
Driving with a Suspended Driver’s License due to a Previous DUI Conviction and Driving Without
a Valid License.  According to the Applicant, his license was no longer suspended at the time of this
arrest, but he had not obtained a new one.  He obtained a valid license to show the court, where he
also pled guilty to the Speeding/Reckless Driving charge and Nolo Contendere to Driving Without
a Valid License.  He paid a fine for these offenses.  (Government Exhibit 9, Transcript at 30-32.)
The Applicant was arrested a second time for DUI on August 19, 1998.  An employee at a
restaurant reported the Applicant to police because this person felt the Applicant to be intoxicated.
The police stopped him and the Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and Driving with a
BAC of greater than .08%.  He was found guilty and received a fine, jail time and five years
probation.  He was also required to complete a drinking and driving course, and have an ignition
interlock device installed on his car.  (Transcript at 32-35.)
The Applicant’s third arrest for DUI occurred on July 25, 2003.  The Applicant had a
blackout while drinking and driving, crashed through a fence, almost hitting a person and wound up
in a farmer’s field.  He was charged with DUI, a probation violation and Assault With a Deadly
Weapon (his vehicle).  He pled guilty to the DUI and probation violation.  The sentence included a
fine, jail time (electronic monitoring), a requirement that he attend an 18 month drinking and driving
course, not consume alcohol or visit bars or liquor stores, and his drivers license was suspended for
15 months.  He also received five years probation, due to end in October 2008.  (Transcript at 35-37.)
The Applicant has had nothing to drink since July 25, 2003, a period of almost four years.
Immediately after his last arrest, the Applicant spent a weekend contemplating his life and
what he should do.  At the end of that weekend he entered residential treatment for alcohol abuse.
He was able to attend treatment for about three weeks.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  At that time the
Applicant became extremely ill and was hospitalized with a potentially fatal condition.  He was in
a medically induced coma for 13 days, eventually recovered after several weeks in the hospital, and
subsequently had months of rehabilitation.  (Transcript at 36-40.)
4
The Applicant did not return to treatment.  Rather, he turned to his church for help.  While
he had attended church for several years on a casual basis, his near-death experience evidently acted
as a wake-up call for him.  His wife, brother, other church members and the church hierarchy all
submitted statements discussing the profound changes that have occurred in how the Applicant views
his life, religion and drinking.  (Applicant’s Exhibits E, F, G, J, U, W and X.)  
The Applicant has found that the church’s bible study classes, mens group and other activities
to be more useful to him than attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous or similar support groups.  The
people at church, many of whom know about his problem, help him be “accountable” and avoid
alcohol in his life.  He further testified that he has no desire for alcohol and evinces a credible intent
not to return to drinking in the future.  (Transcript at 21-23, 42-50.)
Mitigation.
The Applicant is very respected at his job.  He submitted laudatory letters from several senior
military officers, as well as civilian employees of the military, who have worked with the Applicant
over the years.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A, B, C, D, I and V.)  The Applicant’s job entails working
closely with these officers to ensure their safety, the safety of others, as well as that of important
pieces of Government equipment.  These people, with knowledge of the Applicant’s history,
emphatically state that the Applicant is trustworthy, reliable and worthy of having access to classified
information.  
Of particular import is the letter from the officer who was the Applicant’s commander at the
time of the last incident.  He discusses at great length how and why he made the decision not to
replace the Applicant at his job.  This retired officer states that, “As a Commander, it was one of the
best decisions I ever made.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit V at 5.)  
The record also shows that the Applicant’s employer also appreciates how he conducts
himself on the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit L, M, N, O, P and T.)  He is described by his supervisore
as a “top notch” employee who is “always on time and rarely misses work.”  (Applicant’s Exhibit
H.)
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the Department of
Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive, has set forth policy factors which must be given
"binding" consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors should be
followed in every case according to the pertinent guideline.  However, the factors are neither
automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can they supersede the Administrative
Judge's reliance on his own common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature and
the ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.  Because each security clearance case presents
its own unique facts and circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm
of human experience, or apply equally in every case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth above,
the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case will be set forth under CONCLUSIONS,
below.
5
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, “In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following
factors [General Factors]:
(1) The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
(2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation
(3) The frequency and recency of the conduct
(4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
(5) The voluntariness of participation
(6) The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent
behavior changes
(7) The motivation for the conduct
(8) The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
(9) The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in acts of a criminal nature and alcohol abuse that
demonstrates poor judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future."  The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
6
CONCLUSIONS
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the finding
of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the continued holding of a
security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then shifts to the Applicant to go
forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or
outweigh the Government's case.  The Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial evidence that
the Applicant has abused alcohol, and been involved in three  alcohol related criminal incidents
(Guidelines G and J).
The Applicant, on the other hand, has successfully mitigated the Government's case.  The
evidence shows that, since he entered treatment in 2003, the Applicant has eliminated alcohol
consumption.  He has created and followed a church-centered self-help program that allows him to
maintain sobriety.  The Applicant has not successfully completed a recovery program, and he does
not attend a “traditional” support group, such as Alcoholics Anonymous.  However, for the following
reasons, I find that this can be overcome.  The Applicant has been completely abstinent from alcohol
for almost four years as of the date of the hearing.  The Applicant's compelling testimony shows that
his alcohol abuse is a thing of the past, that he is very open about his prior struggle with alcohol, and
that he is fully capable of continuing to abstain from alcohol.  He is extremely remorseful for his
alcohol abuse, as well as his alcohol related criminal convictions.  He has a good employment record
and is extremely involved in his community, as set out at length above and in the record.
With regards to his alcohol abuse, the following Disqualifying Conditions apply: (a) alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; (c) habitual or binge consumption
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; (d) diagnosis by a credentialed medical professional (e.g.,
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence; and (g)
failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence.
However, the record supports the application of the following Mitigating Conditions, which
are sufficient to support the Applicant’s position: (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was
so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and (b) the
individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).
Turning to the concomitant Criminal Conduct allegations, the following Disqualifying
Conditions have application in this case: (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; (d)
the person is currently on parole or probation; and (e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to
complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program.
7
The record in this case also supports the application of the following Mitigating Conditions,
which provide support for the Applicant being granted a security clearance.  They are: (a) so much
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution,
job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.
In addition, application of the General Factors is appropriate and supports a decision in the
Applicant's favor.  The Applicant is motivated to continue his sobriety (factor 7); he shows
considerable evidence of rehabilitation (factor 6); there is little or no potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation or duress (factor 8); and, under the circumstances of this case, the probability that the
Applicant will return to his drinking ways are virtually nil (factor 9). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has successfully overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding
for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of
the Government's Statement of Reasons.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by
Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant.
Wilford H. Ross
Administrative Judge
