                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06795 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: 
John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
Raashid S. Williams, Esq, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence concern raised by his familial ties to 
Pakistan. He has been working as a Government contractor in Afghanistan for nearly 
seven years. His efforts have directly saved the lives of U.S. and NATO troops. He has 
come under enemy fire, and he continues to place his life at risk in support of the vital 
U.S. national security interests in Afghanistan. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2005, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). He fully disclosed his family in Pakistan on his SCA. He has been working as a 
DoD contract linguist in Afghanistan ever since, except for a short two month period in 
late 2007 when he changed employment.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
On May 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that alleges the security 
concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Applicant responded on September 26, 
2011 (Answer). He admitted that his mother, two brothers, and three of his sisters, as 
well as his married siblings’ respective spouses, are resident-citizens of Pakistan. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d). He denied the other SOR allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.i), and 
requested a hearing. 
 
 On July 19, 2011, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready-to-
proceed. After coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for September 1, 
2011.2 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
12, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel also 
submitted GE I through VIII for administrative notice regarding Pakistan.3 Applicant 
appeared at the hearing with his counsel, called his facility security officer (FSO) as a 
witness, and testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
J, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was 
received on September 12, 2011. 
 
Evidentiary Issue 
 
 GE 11 and 12, Applicant’s selective service record and card, were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel extensively questioned Applicant about 
purported discrepancies between these documents and his SCA, specifically as it 
relates to his date of birth and social security number. (Tr. at 33 – 42). As there was no 
SOR allegation regarding these matters, I allowed such inquiry for the limited purpose of 
testing Applicant’s credibility and mitigation case.4 
 
 The evidence established that Applicant’s former FSO had typed in Applicant’s 
date of birth incorrectly on the SCA. Applicant corrected this information during a 
background interview in April 2009. (GE 5 at 1). Applicant voluntarily produced his 
social security card at hearing. The number reflected on Applicant’s social security card 
and his SCA are the same. (Tr. at 102 – 103). 
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2 As a time-management tool, I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to serve one 
another their anticipated exhibits prior to the hearing. The parties complied. 
 
3 Department Counsel submitted a summary of facts from GE I - VIII that the Government asks I 
take administrative notice. The facts administratively noticed are set forth in my findings of fact. I note that 
vast parts of the copies of administrative notice documents that were submitted are illegible.  
 
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing, I provided the Government the opportunity to 
amend the SOR to address any concerns they had regarding Applicant’s selective 
service record and SCA, and in order to provide Applicant fair notice to address said 
concerns.5 Department Counsel responded that “the Government doesn’t believe the 
potential falsifications or discrepancies warrant an amendment of the SOR.”6  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Immigrating to the U.S. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He was born, raised, and educated in Pakistan. His 
father, who was an officer in the Pakistani army, passed away when he was 13 years 
old. After his father passed away, Applicant’s uncles financially supported him and his 
family. Applicant’s uncles are Danish citizens, residing in Denmark. One of his uncles 
owns the home that Applicant was raised in, and his mother still resides in. Applicant 
met his wife in 1998 through an aunt. Applicant’s wife and his aunt are U.S. citizens, 
residing in the United States. Applicant and his wife started a long-distance relationship 
by telephone. They met in person in January 1999 and two-weeks later were married in 
Pakistan. Applicant received his visa and immigrated to the U.S. in May 2000. Between 
the time of his marriage and immigrating to the United States, Applicant operated a 
family business, but it was not financially successful. During this period, Applicant was 
supported by his Danish uncles. He was granted U.S. citizenship in 2004.7 
 
Foreign Family and Friends 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Pakistan. She spends about half the year living 
in the United States, and the other half of the year in Pakistan. She is a woman of 
limited means, and is financially supported by Applicant and his siblings. Applicant is 
close to his mother. He speaks to her frequently by phone and shared a credit card 
account with her.8 (SOR ¶ 1.a). He did not receive anything from the estates of his 
grandmothers when they died, and does not expect to inherit from his mother’s meager 
estate when she dies.9 (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 10-08560 at n. 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 5, 2011); ISCR Case No. 04-08547 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 30, 2007).  
 
6 Tr. at 122-123. Applicant provided the Government his selective service card in July 2008, and 
he was interviewed thereafter on two separate occasions. I must presume the Government investigated 
this matter thoroughly in the three years leading up to the hearing. ISCR Case No. 07-18324 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 11, 2011). 
 
7 GE 1; GE 5; Tr. at 42-56, 57-70.  
 
8 Tr. at 22-23, 61-63; Answer, GE 1 at 20, GE 2 at 2; GE 5 at 2; GE 7, Foreign Influence (FI) 
Questions; GE 8, 4/10/08 Special Interview at 3; GE 9; GE 10 at 7-8. 
 
9 Tr. at 27-28; Answer. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s two brothers are resident-citizens of Pakistan. One is an officer in the 
Pakistani military, assigned to a civil engineering unit doing reconstruction work. He 
holds a rank below Colonel. He is married, and his wife is also a resident-citizen of 
Pakistan. Applicant’s other brother currently works for a private cell phone company, but 
previously worked as a contractor for the Pakistani government. Applicant is not as 
close to his brothers as he is to his mother. He does speak with them by phone, has 
visited with them when he has traveled to Pakistan, and shared a credit card account 
with one of his brothers.10 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d). 
 
 Three of Applicant’s four sisters are resident-citizens of Pakistan. Two of these 
sisters work for local schools in Pakistan. The other does not have a job outside the 
home and is married to a resident-citizen of Pakistan. Her husband works for the same 
cell phone company as Applicant’s brother. Applicant is in regular contact with his 
middle sister in Pakistan, who keeps him informed of his mother’s wellbeing. He speaks 
less often to his other two sisters in Pakistan.11 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). 
 
 Applicant’s fourth sister is a U.S. citizen, living in the United States. Applicant’s 
mother lives with her when she visits the U.S. Applicant’s sister is married and her 
husband is a U.S. citizen. He holds a security clearance and is a Government contractor 
working in Afghanistan. In late 2007, when Applicant was in between jobs, he and his 
brother-in-law tried to start their own business as Government contractors in 
Afghanistan. The business never got off the ground due to the lack of adequate financial 
backing.12 (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
 
 Applicant is close to a cousin who is a U.S. citizen. Several years ago, Applicant 
borrowed a significant amount of money from his cousin to pay-off some personal debt. 
Applicant repaid his cousin this loan, and recently lent his cousin about $15,000 so his 
cousin could purchase a condo in the United States. A few days before the hearing, this 
loan was repaid. Applicant’s cousin holds a security clearance and is currently working 
for a Government contractor in Afghanistan.13 (SOR ¶ 1.i). 
 
 Applicant has been able to save a significant amount of money over the past six 
years and is now in a position to financially assist his family. Altogether, he has lent his 
family about $50,000. He does so in part to pay back his family, including one of his 
Danish uncles, for supporting him during his time of need.14 
10 Tr. at 23-24, 63-64, 100-101; Answer, GE 1 at 21-22, GE 2 at 1-3; GE 5 at 2-3; GE 7, FI; GE 8, 
4/10/08 Special Interview (SI) at 3-4; GE 9; GE 10 at 8. 
 
11 Tr. at 24-26, 65; Answer, GE 1 at 22-23, GE 5 at 3; GE 7, FI; GE 8, SI at 3-5; GE 9. 
 
12 Tr. at 26, 101-102; Answer, GE 1; GE 5; GE 8. 
 
13 Tr. at 82-85, 91, 109, 111-112; Answer; GE 2; GE 5; GE 9. Applicant’s past financial problem 
was not alleged as a concern. I did not consider it for anything other than as it relates to Applicant’s 
relationship with his cousin.  
 
14 GE 2 at 2; GE 5 at 10-11; Tr. at 108-109. See also GE 3 and 4.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant became friends with his barber while assigned to Afghanistan. She is 
from Country Y and is a contract barber for NATO working in Afghanistan. She works on 
one of the U.S. military installations and was screened by the Government before being 
allowed to work on the installation. For a period of time, she served as a Government 
contractor escorting foreign nationals onto a U.S. military installation in Afghanistan. 
Applicant testified that his relationship with this woman is platonic.15 (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 
 Applicant has a childhood friend who is a resident-citizen of Pakistan, and lives 
close to his mother’s house in Pakistan. Applicant is unsure what his friend does for a 
living, but he previously worked for a cell phone company in Pakistan. His friend never 
worked for the Pakistani government or military. Applicant’s contact with this childhood 
friend has been limited and he has not spoken to him in quite some time. He has never 
discussed his work for the U.S. Government with his childhood friend. Whenever his 
friend asked what he did for a living, he would merely say that he was working for a 
casino in the U.S.16 (SOR ¶ 1.h). 
 
 Applicant last traveled to Pakistan in 2007, while in between Government 
contracting jobs. He visited his family while in Pakistan. He has also traveled 
extensively. He has reported his foreign travel to his FSO, on his SCA, and during his 
background interviews.17 During one background interview, Applicant stated that he will 
report any attempt to influence him through his family to the proper authorities, as 
follows: 
 
I have no sympathy for any other country or groups that would do harm to 
the US or our allies. Even though my family still lives in Pakistan, my 
loyalty is to the US. If I learned that my family’s welfare could be in danger 
based on my position, I would do everything I could to help them but my 
efforts would be through the appropriate channels. I would first report the 
issue to my security officer.18 
 
Service as a Linguist: 2005 – Present 
 
 Applicant started working for Government Contractor A (GCA) in May 2005. He 
was assigned to a NATO military unit in Afghanistan. During this period, he 
accompanied his military unit on missions in the field two to three times a month, 
spending up to 10 to 15 days a month in the field. On a number of occasions, Applicant 
saved the lives of members of his unit by listening in on enemy radio traffic and alerting 
his unit when the enemy was attempting to ambush them. Applicant and his unit were 
ambushed by the enemy on one occasion and the convoy he was riding in took direct 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 28-30, 70-81, 108; GE 2 at 3; GE 5 at 5-7, 13; GE 7, Sexual Behavior; GE 9. 
 
16 Tr. at 30; Answer, GE 5 at 11. 
 
17 GE 1; GE 5 at 6-7, 13; GE 9; GE 10; Tr. at 80. 
 
18 GE 5 at 8. See also GE 10. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
fire. His employment with GCA was made more difficult by the lack of adequate 
vacation time to return home to see his wife, which strained his marriage to the point of 
it almost dissolving. He voluntary left GCA’s employment in October 2007.19 
 
 Applicant underwent a counterintelligence (CI) security screening on August 9, 
2007. This CI screening expanded upon the information Applicant had previously 
provided in his SCA and delved more fully into other potential areas of concern. 
Applicant fully discussed his foreign connections, including his family in Pakistan.20 
Applicant stated that he would immediately report to his boss if he were ever 
approached by a foreign government, foreign intelligence or security service, or terrorist 
organization. He also stated that if he were captured by the enemy or terrorist 
organization, he would protect U.S. secrets “with his life.”21 The Government 
investigator concluded that Applicant “speaks excellent English . . . as if it were his first 
language even though Candidate was born and raised in Pakistan. . . . Candidate 
showed no sign of deception during subject interview . . . [he] displayed little or no 
hesitation while discussing the details of his personal life.” The investigator went on to 
recommend Applicant for a security clearance, as long as the criminal background and 
credit checks did not reveal any derogatory information.22  
 
 Applicant began working for Government Contractor B (GCB) in January 2008. 
He was assigned as a linguist working at a U.S. military installation in Afghanistan. 
Applicant submitted an updated SCA when he began working for GCB. Applicant 
requires a security clearance because it is a condition of his employment.23  
 
Applicant no longer accompanies troops into the field, but has been under 
constant attack from the enemy at his current U.S. military base. At least once a week, 
the base is hit by enemy rockets and mortars. The shelling has come as close as 30 
meters from his office. Applicant works long hours and lives on base in a GCB provided 
trailer. He provides vital support to the base in its screening and CI efforts. He cannot 
leave the base because it is far too dangerous as it is well known by the local populace 
that he works for the United States.24 
 
19 Tr. at 21-22, 94-98, 112-113; GE 5 at 6-7. Applicant did not accept a follow-on contract with 
GCA because they wanted to place him with a special operations unit that engages in the most 
dangerous operations. He is unwilling to risk his life so brazenly, but was willing to return to his NATO unit 
or take on other dangerous assignments in Afghanistan. Such decision does not detract from his service. 
 
20 GE 9 and 10. 
 
21 GE 10 at 11, Q. 76 and 78. 
 
22 Id. at 2-3. 
 
23 Tr. at 18-20, 94, 118. Applicant’s FSO testified that he had a copy of Applicant’s current 2008 
SCA. Tr. at 119. Neither side provided a copy of this more recent SCA.  
 
24 Tr. at 22, 99, 103-108; GE 5 at 12.  
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 Several individuals who have served with Applicant in Afghanistan provided 
character letters in support. Each speaks to Applicant’s exemplary work ethic, 
dedication to the mission, and irreplaceable linguistic skills that has provided for the 
security of U.S. and NATO troops. He has received a number of certificates of 
appreciation for his service.25 A Vice President for GCB, who has 32 years of 
experience in the intelligence and security fields and was Applicant’s manager in 
Afghanistan, states: 
 
I first met (Applicant) . . . in January 2008. (Applicant) was one of six 
American interpreters assigned to my project, but immediately he was the 
stand out of the group. . . . (Applicant) is the most conscientious and 
diligent interpreter on my staff. . . . Armed with multi-lingual abilities in 
Pashto, Urdu, and Hindi, in addition to English . . . (he) was quick to point 
out inconsistencies in applications, noted falsifications on official 
documents . . . (He) took on a personal obligation to ensure that all 
persons applying for [sic] were doing so legitimately and correctly. 
(Applicant) was responsible for identifying and effectively stopping several 
attempts by banned individuals trying to circumvent our security 
processes. (He) has a high sense of patriotism to the United States. He 
has never tolerated anyone to speak ill of his adopted country and would 
be the first to squash any anti-American sentiment . . . I have watched and 
managed many individuals who work in the contracting world, but there 
are very few that are as committed as (Applicant) . . . He is not chasing a 
contractor’s paycheck, he is looking after his (GCB) family and for the 
greater good of the lives of those who live and work at (the base).26 
 
Applicant’s FSO testified that Applicant was one of the first individuals GCB 
hired, and they have continued to employ him, even without the necessary security 
clearance, because he is an exemplary employee. The FSO further testified that it is 
difficult to find qualified linguist for this project. Applicant has referred a number of 
excellent candidates that GCB has hired. The FSO “wholeheartedly” recommends 
Applicant for a security clearance.27 
 
 Applicant and his spouse have resided at the same address in the U.S. since 
2001. It is a home that is owned by Applicant’s uncle and aunt, who are U.S. citizens 
and first introduced Applicant to his future wife. He has a substantial amount of money 
saved in a U.S. bank account. It is a joint account with his wife and she manages the 
couple’s finances. He has also saved some money through a 401K account. He does 
not own any foreign property and has no foreign financial interest.28 He is willing “to 
25 AE A – J.  
 
26 AE A. See also AE E (Applicant’s work directly contributed to protecting service members and 
contractors assigned to a forward operating base in Afghanistan).  
 
27 Tr. at 114-121.  
 
28 Tr. at 67-70, 91-93, 109; GE 1; GE 7.  
 
8 
 
 
undergo a polygraph examination to satisfy any questions regarding (his) suitability for a 
position of trust.”29 
 
Pakistan 
 
 Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic that recently went through successful 
democratic elections. It is a developing nation, which is still dealing with natural 
disasters that devastated parts of the country in 2005 and 2010. The core of Al-Qa’ida 
(AQ) is based in Pakistan and its former leader Osama bin Laden was killed by U.S. 
forces in Pakistan in 2011. AQ, the Taliban, and other militants are operating from safe 
havens within Pakistan. According to U.S. intelligence, Pakistani-based militant groups 
and AQ are coordinating their attacks inside Pakistan from the relative safety of these 
safe havens. The presence of these groups poses a potential danger to U.S. citizens 
throughout Pakistan. These groups specifically target U.S. citizens and other Western 
interest, and have successfully carried out attacks and kidnappings against U.S. 
citizens. They have also committed major terrorist attacks against the Pakistani 
government and its citizens. As for the Pakistani government, the U.S. State 
Department has noted that elements within the government continue to commit major 
human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings, disappearances, and torture. The 
failure to prosecute these abuses has led to a culture of impunity.30  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
                                                          
29 GE 2 at 4.  
 
30 GE I – VIII. See also GE 5 at 12 (Applicant states that he does not “consider any portion of 
Pakistan to be safe”). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.31 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”32 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6, as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
31 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
32 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
An applicant’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. There is no per se rule against applicants with familial ties to a foreign country, 
even countries that contain elements, within and outside the foreign government, hostile 
to the vital security interest of the United States. Instead, an applicant with familial ties 
to such a country bears a heavy burden in mitigating the foreign influence concern.33 
 
In addressing the foreign influence concern, key factors an administrative judge 
must consider are:  the foreign government involved, the intelligence gathering history 
of that government, the country’s human rights record, and the presence of terrorist 
activity in that country.34  
 
Applicant’s cousin and brother-in-law do not raise the foreign influence concern. 
They are both U.S. citizens, who have been granted security clearances by the United 
States, and work as Government contractors in Afghanistan. As for Applicant’s barber, 
the Government stated its concern was due to the fact that she resides in Afghanistan, 
and Applicant has frequent contact with her in Afghanistan. (Tr. at 127-128). However, 
she is a NATO contractor supporting the U.S.-led war effort in Afghanistan. She has 
been screened by the Government, and previously was in charge of escorting 
individuals onto a U.S.-military installation. The Government failed to establish that 
Applicant’s contact with his barber creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation that 
is different from his contacts with others he serves with in Afghanistan. Applicant’s 
relationship with his old childhood friend also does not raise the foreign influence 
concern, because their bond is no longer sufficiently close that it could be used by a 
foreign power or entity to manipulate or induce him. Accordingly, I find in Applicants 
favor as to SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i.35 
 
On the other hand, Applicant’s familial ties to Pakistan through his mother, two 
brothers, and three sisters, coupled with Pakistan’s “human rights record, the presence 
of terrorist activity there, and other geopolitical factors,” squarely implicates the foreign 
influence concern.36 His frequent contact with, and deep connections to, these family 
members also establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
33 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 10 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (“As a matter of common sense and 
sound risk management under the ‘clearly consistent with the national interest’ standard, an applicant 
with immediate family members living in a country hostile to the United States should not be granted a 
security clearance without a very strong showing that those family ties do not pose a security risk.”).  
 
34 ISCR Case No. 09-05812 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (heightened risk of foreign influence 
established where applicant’s family members resided in a country that has trouble with terrorism and 
history of human rights abuses). 
 
35 I also find for Applicant as to SOR ¶ 1.f, because the potential inheritance he might receive 
from his mother’s meager estate is simply insufficient to raise a concern.  
 
36 ISCR Case No. 11-01920 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2011). 
 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
 AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of mitigating conditions that could mitigate the foreign 
influence concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and find that only AG 
¶ 8(b) warrants discussion. AG ¶ 8(b) states: 
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
 In addressing AG ¶ 8(b), the Appeal Board has held that 
 
Generally, an Applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to what he would 
do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to 
little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the U.S. is very important and can lead to a favorable result for 
an applicant in a Guideline B case. In this case, Applicant has served the 
U.S. military as a translator in dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan 
and has risked his life to protect American personnel there.37 
 
 Applicant has saved the lives of NATO troops in Afghanistan, he has been under 
direct fire when his convoy was ambushed, his work has directly provided for the safety 
of American and NATO troops, and he has lived with constant shelling over the past few 
years – all in support of the U.S.-led mission in Afghanistan. However, such service 
does not automatically trump the Guideline B concern as argued by Applicant’s counsel. 
(Tr. at 129). Instead, it is a key factor that must be taken into account in addressing the 
foreign influence concern.  
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States 12 years ago, he took the Oath of 
Allegiance upon becoming a U.S. citizen in 2004, and has been married to a U.S. 
citizen and resided at the same address in the U.S. for over a decade. His assets are in 
the U.S., and his wife manages their finances. At the same time, Applicant’s bonds to 
37 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also 
ISCR Case No. 06-25928 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008) (adverse decision remanded because judge apparently 
failed to consider that applicant’s “compliance with security procedures and regulations occurred in the 
context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the national security.”); ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) (same).  
 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
his family in Pakistan are long and deep, especially when it comes to his mother. He 
speaks with her frequently, supports her financially, and even had a joint credit card 
account with her. His brother is an officer in the Pakistani military. As Applicant 
acknowledges, there is no place in Pakistan that is safe. The risk of foreign exploitation 
exists. However, none of Applicant’s family members hold high government positions or 
otherwise standout as targets to hostile forces within Pakistan.38 For the past six years, 
the same risk of foreign exploitation identified in the SOR has existed, and Applicant’s 
fidelity to the U.S. and its mission in Afghanistan has never once faltered or been 
questioned by those with whom he serves.  
 
 Although Applicant may not have been born in the United States, he has 
demonstrated, through his service in Afghanistan, that his commitment to the U.S. is no 
less than those born and raised in this country. He has voluntarily agreed to CI 
screening and numerous background investigations, in order to prove his suitability to 
hold a security clearance. The agent who conducted his CI screening, as well as those 
who have served with him in Afghanistan, all found him to be a dedicated American and 
resolute in his resolve to protect the nation and its secrets. He has fully complied with 
reporting requirements throughout the security clearance process and those imposed by 
his employer. Over the course of several interviews and in response to a lengthy 
interrogatory, Applicant has freely and fully discussed his foreign connections. In light of 
the foregoing, I find that Applicant would resolve any attempt to influence him through 
his family members in Pakistan in favor of national security. Applicant established AG ¶ 
8(b) and, thereby, mitigated the foreign influence concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).39 I incorporate my foreign influence analysis herein and 
note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant has volunteered to put himself in 
harms way in order to support the vital national security interests of the United States in 
Afghanistan. As relayed by his former manager, Applicant’s motivation is not to chase a 
contractor’s paycheck, but instead to provide for the safety and security of those with 
whom he serves in Afghanistan. His service has not come without sacrifice, including 
almost losing his marriage due to the lack of adequate vacation time to return home on 
38 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 09-07066 (App. Bd. Jul. 26, 2011) (father held important position 
in the embassy of a foreign country); ISCR Case No. 09-06457 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011) (prominent 
father in Afghan government).  
 
39 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
13 
 
 
leave to visit his wife. He has understood the Government’s need to peer into his foreign 
relationships and has always complied with any request for information. Even after 
numerous interviews over the past seven years, Applicant still stands ready to prove his 
suitability by offering to take a polygraph. These whole-person factors, in conjunction 
with the favorable matters noted above, fully mitigate the foreign influence concern. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
