 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01988   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: J. Ransdell Keene, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated sexual behavior security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
criminal conduct, drug involvement, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines J (criminal conduct), H (drug involvement), E (personal conduct), and D 
(sexual behavior). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 24, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 2011, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
December 9, 2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 32. GE 15 was admitted over Applicant’s objection. The other 
exhibits were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 
A through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 19, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He seeks to retain his security clearance. He attended 
college, but he has not earned a degree. He served in the U.S. military from 1985 until 
he received a general under honorable conditions discharge in 1995. He is married for 
the third time. He has four children and a stepchild.1 
  
 Applicant smoked marijuana and used cocaine before he joined the military. He 
had a series of disciplinary problems in the military. He was stationed overseas in 1986. 
In June 1986, the wife of another service member complained that she was swimming 
in a lake when Applicant attempted to pull her bikini bottom off, grabbed her in the groin 
area, and attempted to kiss her. Applicant admitted to attempting to kiss her, but he 
denied attempting to pull her bikini bottom off or indecently assaulting her. The Criminal 
Investigation Division (CID) conducted an investigation and listed the offense as 
indecent assault. In July 1986, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) under 
Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He received restriction and 
extra duties for 14 days. It is unclear what punitive article of the UCMJ he was 
determined to have committed.2 
 
 In March 1987, Applicant and another service member told the employee at the 
door of the enlisted club that they were CID agents. They told the employee that they 
needed to enter the club because they were working on an investigation, and they 
would be attempting to make a drug purchase. They entered the club without paying the 
entrance fee. In May 1987, Applicant received NJP for impersonating a CID agent with 
intent to defraud. He received restriction and extra duties for 45 days and $150 in 
forfeiture of pay.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in November 1992 and charged with driving under the 
influence of intoxicating liquor (DUI). He pleaded guilty. He was fined $495, incarcerated 
for 24 hours, ordered to have alcohol screening, and his driver’s license was suspended 
for 90 days.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 22, 43, 78-80; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21, 74; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 21. 
 
 
3 
 
 A woman alleged in April 1994 that Applicant had sexually assaulted her. The 
CID investigated the allegation, but the woman ultimately refused to cooperate, and 
Applicant was never prosecuted for the offense. Applicant denied an assault ever 
occurred. He stated that he was “not in the room and DNA excluded [him].”5  
 
 In December 1994, as part of a unit-directed urinalysis, Applicant’s urine sample 
tested positive, indicating the use of cocaine. Applicant held a security clearance at the 
time. On February 1, 1995, Applicant received NJP for using cocaine between October 
30, 1994, and November 1, 1994. He received a one-pay-grade reduction, extra duties 
and restriction for 45 days, and $600 in forfeiture of pay per month for two months. The 
restriction and the second month of forfeitures were suspended.6 
 
 On February 7, 1995, military police were informed that a urine sample that 
Applicant submitted as part of a unit-directed urinalysis on January 23, 1995, had tested 
positive indicating the use of cocaine. On February 14, 1995, Applicant received NJP for 
using cocaine between January 21, 1995, and January 23, 1995, and using marijuana 
between January 3, 1995, and January 23, 1995. He received reduction to pay grade E-
1, extra duties and restriction for 45 days, and $427 in forfeiture of pay per month for 
two months.7 
 
 Applicant was discharged from the military in February 1995, with a general 
under honorable conditions discharge. The basis of the discharge was misconduct.8 
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 1996 and charged with simple battery. He 
pleaded guilty to the amended charge of disturbing the peace. He was sentenced to a 
fine or ten days in jail, and probation for six months. Applicant stated that he “caught 
[his] girlfriend at the time cheating and took a wreath off of her door and threw it in a 
swimming pool.”9  
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 1997 and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI), first offense. He pleaded guilty to the amended charge of reckless 
operation. He was fined $200, plus $76 court costs. He stated that he “did not blow over 
the limit so the charge was reduced to a misdemeanor.”10  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
6 Tr. at 24-32, 46-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6, 10, 21. 
 
7 Tr. at 24-32, 46-49, 80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7, 8. 
 
8 Tr. at 31, 53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 9. 
 
9 Tr. at 32-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 18; AE C. 
 
10 Tr. at 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 18; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
 A restraining order was issued against Applicant in May 2001, granting 
Applicant’s ex-wife custody of their child, and prohibiting Applicant from removing the 
child from the jurisdiction of the court.11  
 
 As part of a custody battle, the judge ordered that Applicant and his ex-wife 
undergo drug tests. Applicant tested positive for the active ingredient in marijuana 
during a drug test administered in May 2001.12 
 
 Applicant was terminated from his employment in March 2002, when he violated 
his company’s smoking policy. He was previously warned not to smoke in his office, but 
he did it anyway.13 
 
 In April 2002, police responded to a call at Applicant’s stepfather’s house. 
Applicant’s wife at the time told the police that Applicant grabbed her by the back of her 
head and pushed her down while she was holding their baby. He then grabbed the baby 
and ran out of the house. Applicant’s stepfather tried to stop him, but Applicant pushed 
his stepfather. Applicant put the baby in the truck and drove off. Applicant’s stepfather 
verified the account given by Applicant’s ex-wife. He also told the police that he heard 
Applicant say that he wanted to blow his head off. Applicant returned while the police 
were at his stepfather’s house. He agreed to go to the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) hospital. Applicant’s stepfather and ex-wife later told the police that they did not 
want to pursue charges. Applicant was never prosecuted for the incident. Applicant 
denied the incident, stating “[n]othing was substantiated.” He admitted that he pushed 
his stepfather out of the way.14  
 
 As part of treatment by the VA, Applicant had a drug test in April 2002. He tested 
positive for the active ingredient in marijuana.15 
 
 Applicant submitted an online application for a position with the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) in May 2003. He reported “use of marijuana, more than fifteen 
times in life.” That disclosure was an automatic disqualifier, and he never received a 
position.16 
 
 Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal Employment (OF 306) in May 
2005. He answered “No” to the question that asked if, during the last five years, he had 
been fired from a job, quit after being told he would be fired, or left a job by mutual 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 35-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11. 
 
12 Tr. at 49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 12. 
 
13 Tr. at 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 13. 
 
14 Tr. at 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 14. 
 
15 Tr. at 49-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 12; AE E. 
 
16 Tr. at 54-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 16; AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
agreement because of specific problems. He failed to list his 2001 termination for 
smoking. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the OF 306. He stated that he “may 
have got confused with the dates.” A copy of Appellant’s resume is attached to the OF 
306. The resume lists September 2002 as the end date for Applicant’s employment with 
the company that terminated him for smoking.17 I find that Applicant intentionally 
falsified the OF 306. 
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife applied for a protective order against Applicant in May 2007. 
She stated that he had been abusive toward the children. She stated that in February 
2007, Applicant hit her in the jaw, spit in her face, and told her that he would kill her if 
she called 911. She stated that he told family friends that he would kill her. A protective 
order was issued against Applicant on May 10, 2007. The order was dismissed on May 
22, 2007. Applicant denied any abuse, stating “[n]othing was substantiated.”18  
 
 In May 2007, police investigated Applicant for allegations related to his child. The 
investigation reported the allegations as unfounded, and no further action was taken.19 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
June 2007. He answered “No” to the question that asked if, during the last seven years, 
he had been fired from a job, quit after being told he would be fired, left a job by mutual 
agreement following allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory performance, or left a 
job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. He failed to list his 2001 
termination for smoking. Applicant also answered on the SF 86 that he had not used 
illegal drugs during the last seven years. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 
86. He stated that he did not know why the SF 86 did not list his marijuana use.20 I find 
that Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86. 
 
 As part of his divorce action and custody battle, the judge ordered a mental 
health evaluation of Applicant and his former wife. A licensed clinical social worker 
(LCSW) submitted a report in September 2007. The LCSW reported that Applicant 
refused to comply with four random drug screening tests scheduled during the 
evaluation process. He complied with a random drug test in August 2007, which tested 
negative. He admitted to the LCSW that he smoked marijuana on a consistent basis 
since his teen years, but he stated that he was no longer smoking marijuana. He 
admitted to the LCSW that he had been physically abusive to his ex-wife.21 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in November 2007. A signed statement was not taken, but the 
interview was summarized in a report of investigation (ROI). In November 2009, 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 55-59, 74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 17. 
 
18 Tr. at 39-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 20. 
 
19 Tr. at 40, 74, 76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 19. 
 
20 Tr. at 59-63, 74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
21 GE 22. 
 
6 
 
Applicant certified the ROI as accurate. He told the investigator that he had not used 
illegal drugs since he left the military. Applicant testified that he used marijuana until 
2002. He stated that he did not know why the investigator reported that Applicant stated 
that he had not used marijuana since before he left the military.22 I find that Applicant 
intentionally provided false information to the OPM investigator. 
 
 As part of a court-ordered evaluation, Applicant answered a written questionnaire 
on January 16, 2008.23 He wrote that he last used marijuana in February 2007, and he 
last used cocaine in 2000.24 
 
 Applicant was arrested on February 18, 2008, and charged with unauthorized 
entry of an inhabited dwelling. An abuse prevention order was issued against him on 
February 28, 2008. In January 2009, Applicant pleaded guilty to the amended charge of 
entering and remaining after being forbidden. He was sentenced to serve six months in 
jail, a fine, and probation for one year. The time in jail was suspended. Applicant stated 
that he “went to his girlfriend’s house and she demanded that [he] leave.”25  
 
 Applicant was interviewed again by an OPM investigator in September 2008. He 
told the investigator that, while he was in the military, he had intentionally smoked 
marijuana before a drug test as a means to be discharged from the military. He denied 
any illegal drugs use since that incident. He stated that he had never been arrested in 
any state. Applicant certified the accuracy of the report of this interview when he 
responded to DOHA interrogatories in November 2009. Applicant testified that he did 
not remember if he told the investigator that he had not used illegal drugs since he left 
the military. He also testified that he thought the investigator was asking about arrests 
within the last seven years. He stated that he did not tell the investigator about his 
February 2008 arrest because “[he] thought that was a misdemeanor.”26 I find that 
Applicant intentionally provided false information to the OPM investigator. 
 
 Applicant initially testified that he only used cocaine once, when he was about 19 
or 20 years old. He later stated that he used it “Once, twice. Less than five [times],” 
when he was about 19 years old. He stated that he did not use cocaine before his first 
urinalysis in the military. He stated that he placed cocaine in his urine, so that he would 
test positive and be discharged from the military. He stated that he had post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) related to his multiple deployments to combat zones, and his 
mother was critically ill. He stated that he was unable to get help from the military 
medical facility.27 Applicant’s testimony about his cocaine use was not credible. 
                                                          
22 Tr. at 63-65, 74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 24. 
 
23 The questionnaire is misdated in some places as January 16, 2007. 
 
24 GE 31. 
 
25 Tr. at 41-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 23, 25. 
 
26 Tr. at 65-70, 74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 24. 
 
27 Tr. at 25-32, 45-46. 
 
7 
 
 Applicant admitted that he smoked marijuana before his positive drug test in the 
military. He stated that he periodically smoked marijuana until 2002. He denied any 
illegal drug use after 2002. He received drug counseling as mandated for his divorce 
and custody proceedings. He stated that his employer randomly tests its employees for 
drugs, and he has never tested positive on one of the tests.28 Applicant’s testimony 
about his marijuana use was not credible. 
 
 Applicant received a number of awards and medals while he was in the military. 
The attorney in Applicant’s custody case wrote a letter on his behalf. He wrote that 
Applicant is “trustworthy and loyal,” and “a hard-working man who is extremely 
passionate about his children and the responsibilities of being a father.” A retired 
sergeant major, who has known Applicant for more than 25 years, wrote that Applicant’s 
“level of reliability and integrity would be an asset to any organization,” and that he 
“would gladly have [Applicant] serve with [him] again.”29  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
28 Tr. at 25-32, 43-46, 64, 71, 77. 
 
29 GE 9, 29; AE A. 
 
8 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant’s multiple military offenses, arrests, and convictions are sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k allege that Applicant was investigated for criminal acts. 
Neither allegation resulted in an arrest or a conviction. However, there is sufficient 
evidence that Applicant assaulted his ex-wife and stepfather in April 2002, and he 
assaulted and threatened his ex-wife in February 2007. AG ¶ 31(c) is applicable for 
those allegations. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant was investigated in 1994 for indecent assault, 
indecent exposure, and forcible sodomy. SOR ¶ 1.i alleges that a restraining order was 
issued against Applicant in May 2001. SOR ¶ 1.l alleges that Applicant was investigated 
in 2007 for aggravated incest. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that 
 
9 
 
Applicant committed a criminal offense on any of those occasions. SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.i, and 
1.l are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m duplicates the criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. SOR ¶ 1.o 
duplicates the criminal conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n. SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.o are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant denied committing an indecent assault in 1986. He stated that he only 
kissed the girl. He received NJP for the offense. It is unclear what punitive article of the 
UCMJ he was determined to have committed. AG ¶ 32(c) is applicable to the allegation 
that he committed an indecent assault. It does not mean that he did not commit another 
criminal act. 
 
 Applicant’s last arrest was in February 2008, almost four years ago. However, he 
provided intentionally false information to an OPM investigator in September 2008, and 
he provided intentionally false testimony at his hearing. Those false statements 
constitute criminal violations of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. I have considered Applicant’s 
favorable character evidence and work history. I do not find sufficient evidence of 
successful rehabilitation to warrant the application of AG ¶ 32(d). I am unable to 
determine that Applicant’s criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 
10 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;30  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he used cocaine when he was young, and he smoked 
marijuana until 2002. He used illegal drugs while he held a security clearance. He 
tested positive for cocaine use in 1994 and 1995 and for marijuana use in 2001 and 
2002. All of the above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant tested positive for 
amphetamine, methamphetamine, MDA, and MDMA in April 2002. SOR ¶ 1.g is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant denies smoking marijuana after 2002, and he denies using cocaine 
since he was about 20 years old. His denials lack credibility. He tested positive for 
cocaine use in 1994 and in 1995. He denied using cocaine before the drug test. He 
stated that he placed cocaine in the urine, so that he would test positive and be 
discharged from the military. Applicant was interviewed as part of a court-ordered 
                                                          
30 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
11 
 
mental health evaluation in September 2007. He admitted to the LCSW that he smoked 
marijuana on a consistent basis since his teen years, but he stated that he was no 
longer smoking marijuana. He answered a written questionnaire in January 2008. He 
wrote that he last used marijuana in February 2007, and he last used cocaine in 2000. 
There is sufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant used cocaine until at least 2000 
and marijuana until at least 2007. Because Applicant’s testimony is unbelievable, I am 
unable to conclude that there has been an appropriate period of abstinence or that 
illegal drug use is completely in his past. Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt 
on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) has limited 
applicability. He does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale. 
In sum, I conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
12 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his OF 306 in 2005 and his SF 86 in 2007, when 
he failed to list his 2001 termination for smoking. He intentionally falsified his SF 86, 
when he failed to list his marijuana and cocaine use. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his drug use to an OPM 
investigator in 2007, and he intentionally provided false information about his drug use 
and criminal history to an OPM investigator in 2008. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant’s termination for violating his company’s smoking policy establishes AG 
¶ 16(d) as a disqualifying condition.  
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct and illegal drug use in the military created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) has been raised as a 
disqualifying condition. 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a and 3.c allege personal conduct that is already alleged under another 
personal conduct allegation. SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 
13 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant provided intentionally false information on questionnaires in 2005 and 
2007. He provided false information to background investigators in 2007 and 2008. He 
was less than candid at his hearing. There are no personal conduct mitigating 
conditions applicable.  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant committed the 
sexual behavior alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶ 4.1 is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
14 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, H, E, and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his military service, 
including his deployments in support of our nation’s defense. However, Applicant has a 
long history of questionable behavior, including illegal drug use, criminal conduct, and 
dishonesty.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated sexual behavior security concerns, but he has not mitigated criminal conduct, 
drug involvement, and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.d-3.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.1:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
