 
1 
 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07319 
                                                            )                      
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on July 7, 2009. On May 19, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 13, 2011, and requested a decision on the 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on July 5, 2011. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 
12. On July 7, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on July 15, 2011. On August 4, 2011, Applicant 
responded with a letter and four attachments comprising 27 pages. On August 14, 
2011, Applicant provided another letter and eight attachments comprising 42 pages. On 
September 15, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s 
letter of August 4, 2011, with four attachments, as Item A, and I marked her letter of 
August 14, 2011, with eight attachments, as Item B. Items A and B were entered in the 
record without objection.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.); one allegation of disqualifying conduct under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.); two allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 3.a. and 3.b.); and one allegation of 
disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶ 4.a.).  In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the Guideline H allegations, the Guideline J 
allegation, and the Guideline E allegation at ¶ 3.a. She denied the Guideline E 
allegation at ¶ 3.b. and the Guideline F allegation at ¶ 4.a. Applicant’s admissions are 
entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old and employed as an investigations assistant by a 
government contractor. She has worked for her current employer for 29 years. She was 
first awarded a security clearance in 1982. In July 2011, she completed all requirements 
for a degree in criminal justice administration. (Item 4; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant, who has no children, has been married three times. Applicant married 
for the first time in February 1985, and she and her husband divorced ten months later. 
Applicant married for the second time in 1987. She and her second husband divorced in 
2001. Applicant married for the third time in 2001. She met and married her third 
husband while he was incarcerated in a state prison and serving a life sentence for 
murder. (Item 4; Item 8.) 
 
 In March 2006, Applicant secreted heroin in her body and went to visit her 
husband in prison. She also smoked a half cigarette of marijuana the night before going 
to the prison, and she had marijuana in her possession. During her visit with her 
husband, she gave him the heroin she had brought. Her actions were observed, and 
she was arrested inside the prison. State police charged Applicant with felony 
possession of drugs in a state prison; felony non-inmate selling and furnishing drugs to 
an unauthorized person; felony conspiracy to commit a crime; and misdemeanor 
possession of marijuana. In August 2006, Applicant pled guilty and was convicted of 
felony transportation of a controlled substance, heroin, for sale to noncontiguous 
 
3 
 
 
county. She was sentenced to 36 months probation, community service, fines, and 
mandatory drug testing. She completed 912 hours of community service on February 
2009. She completed her probation in August 2009. She has not visited her husband at 
the prison since her arrest in 2006, although she does continue to correspond with him. 
She told an authorized investigator that she intends to reestablish her visitation rights 
with her husband at some time in the future. (Item 8; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant asserted that she abstained from using illegal drugs after her marijuana 
use in 2006. In response to DOHA interrogatories, she reported that she had not sought 
counseling or treatment to avoid drug use in the future. (Item 7; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant completed an e-QIP in July 2009. Section 23a on the e-QIP asks the 
following question: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, 
for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, speed, crystal 
methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants, (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.)[,] or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a controlled 
substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or 
otherwise consuming any controlled substance.” (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Question 23a. She did not report that she had used 
marijuana in March 2006. When she was interviewed by an authorized investigator, 
Applicant denied any drug use. However, in response to DOHA interrogatories, 
Applicant admitted she had used marijuana on the night before her arrest at the state 
prison. She explained that she did not tell the investigator about her marijuana use 
because she was “concentrating on her conviction.” In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant denied that she intentionally failed to list her marijuana use on her e-QIP. She 
stated that her marijuana use was a one-time event and occurred under unique 
circumstances. Additionally, she stated that she suffered some memory loss when 
completing her e-QIP and attempting to recall the events surrounding her arrest in 
March 2006, which she characterized as traumatic. (Item 4; Item 7; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant has had difficulty managing her finances and paying her legitimate 
debts. When she was interviewed by an authorized investigator in August 2009, 
Applicant stated that in 2005 her debts became unmanageable. She estimated that she 
owed approximately $25,000 in credit card debt. She retained a debt management firm, 
and she authorized the firm to deduct $689 each month from her checking account to 
pay her credit card accounts, which were in collection status. She told the investigator 
that she had reduced her credit card debt to $15,000. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties have made it difficult for her to pay her federal 
income taxes as required. In April 2009, she filed her 2008 federal tax return. She owed   
$7,048 in federal taxes, but she lacked the money to pay them. She did not contact the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to request a payment plan. After the IRS contacted her 
and requested payment, Applicant borrowed approximately $6,200 from her 401k plan 
 
4 
 
 
to pay part of her 2008 federal income tax debt. She told the investigator that she still 
owed approximately $848, and she stated that she intended to pay the remainder of her 
2008 federal income tax debt in September 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant did not file her 2010 federal income tax return when required. Applicant 
provided documentation showing that in June 2011, she contacted the IRS and 
indicated she would pay her 2010 federal income tax debt of $2,189 by October 12, 
2011. Applicant’s documentation showed that the IRS accepted her offer of payment. 
The record does not contain documentation showing that Applicant made the payment 
when she said she would. (Item B.)     
 
 Applicant did not provide a personal financial statement. However, her federal 
income tax return for 2008, which she provided for the record, showed that she earned 
approximately $54,000 in salary in 2008. Applicant provided documentation showing 
that a debt management firm, which she retained in 2010, had obtained a settlement 
offer from one of Applicant’s creditors. The agreement required that Applicant pay 
$1,180 on April 4, 2011, $96 on May 4, 2011, and $96 on June 4, 2011. (Item 9; Item 
B.) 
 
 Applicant provided several letters of character reference from coworkers and 
friends. Applicant’s references stated that Applicant was conscientious, reliable, and a 
hard worker. A colleague who had known Applicant for many years stated that after her 
divorces, Applicant became lonely. He opined that Applicant’s loneliness caused her to 
become involved with the prison inmate who became her third husband. Her security 
manager stated that Applicant was a team player and had never required disciplinary 
action during her 29 years with her employer. The security manager also provided 
copies of Applicant recent performance appraisals, which showed her to meet or 
exceed expectations. (Item B.) 
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged her criminal conduct and 
stated that it was a “terrible mistake.” She stated that she committed the criminal act out 
of love for her husband, had paid her debt to society, and sought to put her criminal 
actions behind her. (Item A.)   
 
                                                     Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.”  
 
Through Applicant’s admissions, the record establishes that she possessed 
heroin and gave it to her husband, a state prison inmate, in March 2006. Moreover, the 
record establishes that Applicant used marijuana on the night before she visited her 
husband in prison and provided him with heroin. This behavior casts doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It also raises security concerns about 
her ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use and her possession of heroin raise security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 
24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of her security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
Applicant asserts that her last use of marijuana was in March 2006, 
approximately six years ago. After using the marijuana, she proceeded the next day to 
smuggle heroin into the state prison to give to her husband, who was incarcerated 
there. Applicant’s illegal drug use, which occurred when she was about 51 years old, 
continues to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
7 
 
 
While she has not visited her husband in prison since March 2006, Applicant remains in 
contact with him and intends to visit him in the future. She failed to demonstrate that 
she had changed her conduct to avoid environments where drugs are used. She did not 
provide a signed statement of her intent not to abuse drugs in the future, with automatic 
revocation of her security clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred when she was a mature adult of 51 years, 
suggesting a lifestyle choice that went beyond youthful curiosity and experimentation.  
Insufficient time has elapsed to demonstrate whether she will abstain from illegal drug 
use in the future. I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) do not apply in mitigation 
to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶ 30. 
 
 Applicant used the illegal drug marijuana in March 2006. She was arrested in 
March 2006 and charged with felony possession of drugs in a state prison; felony non-
inmate sell or furnish drugs to an unauthorized person; felony conspiracy to commit a 
crime; and misdemeanor possession of marijuana. She pled guilty to felony 
transportation of a controlled substance, heroin, for sale to noncontiguous county. She 
was sentenced to 36 months probation, community service, fines, and mandatory drug 
testing. Her probation expired in March 2009.  
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct raises concerns under AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). AG ¶ 
31(a) identifies a potential security concern when an individual has committed “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) provides: “allegation or admission 
or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”   
 
  Two mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case. If “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply. If “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior occurred nearly six 
years ago, in 2006. She completed her probation and community service. She has a 
good employment record and has pursued higher education. However, Applicant’s 
criminal act was a serious crime which she committed as a mature adult of 51 years. In 
 
8 
 
 
her response to the FORM, she characterized the crime as a “terrible mistake” but 
asserted that she had committed the crime out of love for her husband, an inmate 
serving a life sentence in prison for murder. Applicant further stated she believed she 
had paid her debt to society and wanted to get on with her life. 
 
  Applicant’s rationale for explaining her criminal conduct raises continuing 
concerns about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Additionally, her statement 
that she committed a serious crime out of love raises concerns about her rehabilitation 
and ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. It is not clear from 
the record that Applicant’s criminal behavior and rule violations are unlikely to recur. 
While I conclude that AG ¶ 32(d) applies in part, I also conclude that AG ¶ 32(a) does 
not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant used marijuana in March 2006, before transporting heroin to her 
husband, an inmate in a state prison. At the prison, she was arrested and charged with 
several felony counts and misdemeanor possession of marijuana. She was convicted of 
felony transportation of a controlled substance, heroin, for sale to noncontiguous 
county. When she executed her e-QIP in July 2009, Applicant admitted her arrest and 
the felony charges and conviction that resulted. However, in response to Section 23a on 
the security clearance application, she answered “No” when asked if she had illegally 
used any controlled substance in the last seven years. In her answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied that she had deliberately falsified her security clearance application by 
failing to report her marijuana use in March 2006. Applicant’s personal conduct raises 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . .  .” Applicant’s conviction of felony transportation 
of the controlled substance heroin for sale to noncontiguous county raises the security 
 
9 
 
 
concern that this conduct, if known, could affect her personal or professional standing 
and cause her to be vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Three Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant 2006’s criminal 
conviction. If “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply.  Additionally, AG ¶ 17(d) might apply in 
mitigation if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to occur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if “the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” 
 
Applicant’s felony conviction was a serious matter. Even though the conviction 
took place six years ago, the fact that it occurred when she was a mature adult 
continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant has pursued an academic degree, and this is to her credit. She is regarded as 
a valuable employee and colleague by those who work with her. Applicant plans to 
resume her relationship with her husband in prison. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply in mitigation. I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply in part in 
mitigation.  
 
 In August 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant admitted she 
had used marijuana on the night before her arrest at the state prison. She explained 
that she did not tell the investigator about her marijuana use because she was 
“concentrating on her conviction.” In her response to the FORM, Applicant denied that 
she intentionally failed to list her marijuana use on her e-QIP. She stated that her 
marijuana use was a one-time event and occurred under unique circumstances. 
Additionally, she stated that she suffered some memory loss when completing her e-
QIP and attempting to recall the events surrounding her arrest in March 2006, which 
she characterized as traumatic.  
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing 
falsification cases: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind 
when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to 
present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). 
 
 I have reviewed the record as a whole and have looked at direct and 
circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s state of mind at the time she omitted 
information about her marijuana use in response to Section 23. Applicant is a mature 
adult who has, in the course of her 29 years of employment as a government contractor, 
completed security clearance applications. She was first awarded a security clearance 
in 1982. She knew, or should have known, of the importance of telling the truth to the 
Government when seeking a security clearance.  
 
 When Applicant completed her security clearance application in 2009, she 
responded “No” when asked if she had used illegal drugs in the past seven years, even 
though she had used marijuana in March 2006, three years before completing her 
security clearance application. She denied using illegal drugs in her personal security 
interview. In reviewing the report of investigation and responding to DOHA 
interrogatories in August 2010, Applicant admitted her March 2006 drug use. 
  
 Applicant completed her e-QIP in July 2009. She was interviewed by an 
authorized investigator August 2009 and denied any drug use. For over a year, until she 
provided information on her marijuana use in August 2010, Applicant made no good-
faith efforts to correct the falsification in her e-QIP. She did not claim that the 
falsification occurred as a result of improper or inadequate advice of authorized 
personnel. Her falsification was neither minor nor infrequent. Instead, it appeared to 
constitute a pattern and cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. After reviewing the evidence as a whole, I conclude that Applicant’s “No” 
answer to Section 23 was deliberate, and that none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply. 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
11 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant reported that her debts became “unmanageable” in 2005.  
Additionally, she failed to provide documentation that she has paid her federal income 
taxes when required. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant failed to provide documentation that she had voluntarily satisfied her 
2008 federal tax debt or her 2010 federal tax debt. Applicant stated that she had not 
received financial counseling. Because she did not provide a personal financial 
statement, it was not possible to determine her net monthly income or her monthly 
expenses and debt payments. While Applicant acknowledged her financial 
delinquencies, it was not clear that she understood her financial problems or how to 
resolve them. She did not appear to have a plan in place to respond to future financial 
contingencies. I conclude that none of the Financial Consideration mitigating conditions 
fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
12 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances raised by the record in this case. 
 
Applicant’s coworkers and friends consider her to be a conscientious and reliable 
worker. She has completed a course of study in criminal justice administration. 
 
 However, as a mature adult in her fifties, Applicant used marijuana, possessed 
heroin, and voluntarily committed a serious crime to show her love for her husband, who 
was incarcerated in a state prison and serving a life sentence for murder. Applicant’s 
illegal drug use and criminal behavior reflected a disregard for laws, rules, and 
regulations, and it also raised concerns about her judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. When she completed her e-QIP in July 2009, Applicant deliberately 
failed to report her marijuana use in March 2006. Additionally, Applicant has a history of 
financial problems, and she failed to provide documentation to establish that she paid 
her 2008 and 2010 federal income taxes timely and in accord with her written 
agreements to do so. 
 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record. She provided additional 
information in response to the FORM. However, Applicant failed to meet her burden of 
persuasion in mitigating the Government’s allegations under the drug involvement, 
criminal conduct, personal conduct, and financial considerations adjudicative guidelines. 
I have assessed the evidence in light of the whole-person concept. Overall, the record 
evidence in this case leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a. and 1.b.:      Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:               AGAINST APPLICANT   
 
13 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:            Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a.:   Against Applicant   
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
