 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 09-08047    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
maintains dual citizenship with Russia. Concerned about the repercussions to himself 
and his family members who still reside in Russia, he is unwilling to surrender his 
Russian passport or renounce his Russian citizenship. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on May 25, 2011, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOAH) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it 
detailed the factual bases for the action under the security guidelines known as 
Guideline B for foreign influence and Guideline C for foreign preference. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 25, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 14, 
2011. He did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. Items 1 
through 6 were admitted to the record as the Government’s Exhibits (GE) using the 
same numbers for identification. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM dated, 
September 30, 2011, which was admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without 
objection from Department Counsel.  The case was assigned to me on November 23, 
2011. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Russia. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was granted. 
The documentation supporting the facts cited in the FORM, Items 7 through 17, are not 
admitted into evidence, but are included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 7 
through 17. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a government contractor. He was born in 
Moscow, Russia, and immigrated to the United States under an “alien of extraordinary 
ability” program in 1996. Applicant worked as a translator until he went to graduate 
school at a prominent U.S. university in 1998. Between 2006 and 2008, he worked as a 
government contractor for another federal agency and held a public trust clearance.2 
 
Although he became a naturalized citizen in 2002, Applicant maintains dual 
citizenship with Russia. He maintains a valid Russian passport, which does not expire 
until 2013. He uses the passport to enter and exit Russia when he visits his family: his 
parents, his sister and her husband, and his father-in-law.3 Applicant’s wife, also a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and his U.S.-born children also hold dual citizenship with 
Russia. Applicant and his family have no intention of surrendering their Russian 
passports or renouncing their Russian citizenship. According to Applicant, the Russian 
government has a reputation for being “vindictive.” He is concerned that surrendering 
his passport or renouncing his Russian citizenship could be construed by the Russian 
government as a hostile act. He fears that Russian authorities would retaliate by 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 Applicant’s mother-in-law is now deceased.  
 
3 
 
denying him entry into the country, thus cutting him off from his family, or consider him a 
traitor, making life difficult for his family members who live there.4 
 
Applicant’s mother, now retired, worked for a company in the Russian defense 
industry. His father currently works for a government-owned entity in the defense 
industry. Applicant believes that both of his parents have held security clearances with 
the Russian government. Applicant’s parents own their home; Applicant and his sister 
hold an ownership interest granted by statute because they lived in the property at one 
time. The market value of this property interest fluctuates vastly. Applicant 
communicates with his parents weekly via Skype, a video telephone service. Because 
his parents are concerned that the Russian government is monitoring their 
conversations with him, they limit their conversations with Applicant to personal matters. 
Applicant visits his parents in Russia every two years. At least one of his parents visits 
him in the United States every year. 5 
  
 Neither Applicant’s sister nor her husband has connections to the Russian 
government. Applicant communicates with his sister using Skype once per month and 
by e-mail on a daily basis. She has been to the United States to visit Applicant once, but 
they usually see each other when Applicant visits Russia. Applicant’s father-in-law is a 
retired employee of the Russian government.  Applicant communicates with his father-
in-law during his visits to Russia and by Skype every few weeks. In addition, Applicant 
has a host of extended family who are residents and citizens of Russia, but their contact 
is limited. Applicant also maintains contact with a few friends who reside in Moscow.  He 
has a close friend that is a dual U.S. – Russian citizen who lives in the United States. 
Applicant also has contacts with other Russian citizens through his anonymous 
Russian-language lifestyle blog.6   
 
Russia7 
 
The Russian Federation is composed of 21 republics. The government consists 
of a strong president, a prime minister, a bicameral legislature and a weak judiciary. It is 
a vast and diverse country with a population of 142 million people. It achieved 
independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991. It is a 
nuclear superpower that continues to develop politically, socially, and economically.  
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
mutual interest to the United States and Russia are counterterrorism and the reduction 
of strategic arsenals. U.S.-Russian relations have often been strained. The Russian 
Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on collection of information 
from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought to obtain 
                                                          
4 GE 2, GE 3, GE 5. 
 
5 GE 5.  
 
6 GE 5. 
 
7 HE 7 – 17.  
 
4 
 
protected information from them through industrial espionage. Russian espionage 
specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. As of 2005, Russia 
and China were the two most aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected U.S. 
technology and accounted for the majority of such targeting. Russia is a leading arms 
exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related technology to 
China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. In 2010, Russia continued to increase their 
intelligence gathering efforts and intelligence capabilities directed against the United 
States interests worldwide through espionage, technology acquisition, and covert 
actions. Also in 2010, the United States Department of Justice announced arrests of ten 
alleged secret agents for carrying out long-term, deep-covered assignments on behalf 
of Russia. 
 
Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international human rights standards, 
but human rights abuses continue. The U.S. Department of State reports allegations 
that Russian government officials and others conduct warrantless searches of 
residences and other premises and electronic surveillance without judicial permission. 
This surveillance includes Ministry of Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office 
monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic. Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies 
have legal access to the personal information of users of telephone and cell phone 
services. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel raised three that are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion; and  
 
 
6 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
county, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heighted risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Of these, only AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d), apply.  
 
Applicant’s parents, sister, brother-in-law, father-in-law, and several extended 
relatives and friends are residents and citizens of Russia. The mere possession of close 
ties with family members living in Russia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. 
Applicant has demonstrated that he is bound to his family by strong bonds of affection. 
The heightened risk raised by his familial connections to Russia is illustrated through 
Applicant’s concerns about the treatment of his family if he were to surrender his 
Russian passport or renounce his Russian citizenship. Seemingly, the risk of negative 
treatment could be triggered if Applicant’s wife or children changed their status as 
Russian citizens.  
 
In addition to the strong bonds of affection Applicant has for his family, the 
professional positions of his parents also create a heighted risk. His father works for a 
government-owned entity in the Russian defense industry and he possibly holds a 
Russian security clearance. Applicant’s mother retired from a position in the defense 
industry. His parents’ concern that the Russian government may monitor their 
conversations with Applicant is well-founded, plausible, and of great security 
significance as the State Department notes allegations that Russian law enforcement 
monitors electronic and telephonic communications of its citizens.  
 
Applicant admits that he owns a share of his parent’s primary residence in 
Moscow. Although property interests in a foreign country may be disqualifying, the 
Government has not established that property interest is substantial to Applicant’s 
current financial situation or that the property interest is a potential source of influence 
or exploitation beyond its mere existence. Applicant’s strong bonds to his family, not the 
home they live in, raise the true security concerns in this case.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
7 
 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s close familial relationships 
and the professions of his parents prevent a finding that Applicant could not be placed 
in a position to choose between the interests of the United States and Russia. These 
factors also prevent a finding that there is no conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
U.S. interests and his strong familial ties to Russia. Also, his contacts with his nuclear 
family, including his father-in-law, cannot be constructed as casual or infrequent. 
However, this description aptly describes Applicant’s contacts with his extended family 
and friends living in Russia. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 As described in AG ¶ 9, a security concern may arise under the following 
circumstances: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 10 is applies to this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. 
 
 Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant continues to use his 
Russian passport on his travels to that country.  
 
Because Applicant has no intention of surrendering his foreign passport or 
renouncing his Russian citizenship, none of the mitigating conditions available under 
AG ¶ 11 are applicable to this case. Applicant’s contention that he uses his Russian 
passport only when traveling to that country has little probative value. As the Appeal 
Board noted, “[t]he negative security significance of acts indicative of foreign preference 
is not negated or diminished merely because an applicant engages in those acts for 
personal reasons or for personal convenience.”8 In this case, Applicant’s use of his 
passport is more than an act of convenience; he also uses the passport and maintains 
his dual citizenship as a safeguard for himself and his family residing in Russia. He is 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 99-0254 at 3 (Feb. 6, 2000). 
 
 
8 
 
concerned that not using the passport or renouncing his citizenship would draw 
unwanted attention from the Russian government to himself and his family.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. In the 16 years since Applicant immigrated to the United 
States, he has married and started a family.  While this is strong evidence of Applicant’s 
ties to the United States, these facts alone are not sufficient to mitigate the foreign 
influence and foreign preference concerns raised in this case. Under the “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard, an applicant has a heavy burden of 
demonstrating extenuation or mitigation of facts with negative security significance. 
Because he failed to meet his burden, I have no choice but to resolve any doubt about 
Applicant’s security worthiness in favor of the national security.9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.-2.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.f.-2.g.:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.h.-2.i:10  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.j.-2.k.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 99-0601at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2001);  ISCR Case No. 99-0511at 8-9 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2000); ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 15, 1999); Dorfmont v. Brown, 914 F.2d 1399, 
1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)(no presumption in favor of granting or continuing a 
security clearance); Directive, Item E2.2.2. (any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security). 
10 SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges that Applicant’s parents are residents and citizens of Russia. SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.i. 
allege the specifics of his parents’ professional histories. The facts concerning Applicant’s parents’ work 
histories are considered in the analysis of the applicability the Guideline B disqualifying conditions. As 
such, the two allegations are considered duplicative of the allegation made in SOR ¶ 1.b. When the same 
conduct is alleged more than once under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt 
alleged twice). Accordingly, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.h. and 1.i. in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
