 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01852 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For: Applicant: Kevin Sherlock, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline K, Handling Protected 
Information and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline K, 
Handling Protected Information and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 22, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 4, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on October 31, 2011, with a hearing date of November 16, 
2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, offered one 
witness, and produced exhibits (AE) 1 through 17 that were admitted into the record 
without any objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied the allegations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. She has been married for 29 years. She has one child. 
She has worked for a defense contractor since 2005. She is a security specialist. She 
has also held a secret clearance since 2005. She has some college.1   
  
 The allegations against Applicant include that she gave unauthorized access to 
classified areas to at least eight persons prior to their signing a nondisclosure 
agreement (NDA). Her action is alleged under both Guidelines K and E. Additionally, 
under Guideline E, it is alleged that she provided false or misleading information to her 
employer on September 17, 2008, when asked about her input of information into the 
Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 2.b).  
  
 Applicant began working for her current employer as a direct-hire employee in 
April 2005. She was hired as an industrial security specialist. She is currently the 
custodian for all classified information for the entire division. Her hiring supervisor 
described her as a top performer who far exceeds standards. He also described the 
many awards she received in the security field, such as an engineering security 
excellence award. She was one of twelve who received the award out of 5,700 
employees. This supervisor has spent most of his career dealing with classified 
information and is a retired chief master sergeant in the Air Force. He further relayed 
that Applicant takes her security duties very seriously. He described her as trustworthy, 
reliable, and worthy of holding a security clearance. He did say that he was unfamiliar 
with the specific issues that led to this hearing for Applicant.2  
 
 In 2007, Applicant remained with her employer, but moved to a location in 
another state. She described the security organization as lacking in overall 
management control. She also demonstrated that she was performing far more duties 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 68; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-33; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
than was optimal for her position and that currently there more people performing all 
those duties. She also was not trained in many of the duties she needed to perform. As 
part of her security duties, she inputted the dates when employees signed their NDA. 
According to Applicant, she was trained by her predecessor to enter all information into 
JPAS the day that it came into their control. As a result, NDA dates were entered when 
employees had not yet actually signed their NDAs. The facilities security officer (FSO) 
became aware of this practice and discovered that at least eight employees had their 
NDA signature dates entered into JPAS before they actually signed the document. The 
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) requires that all 
cleared employees must sign a NDA before being granted access to classified 
information. The FSO conducted an investigation and concluded that the eight people 
gained access to closed areas and had access to classified networks prior to signing 
their NDAs. Applicant claimed that even if JPAS showed that their NDAs had been 
signed when they were not, these people would not have had access to classified 
information. She further explained that a security badge was necessary to gain access 
to the areas in question. The only way to get access was to get a security briefing which 
included signing the NDAs. I find Applicant’s testimony explaining the process credible 
and more helpful than the unsigned security incident report prepared by the FSO. 
Although the incident report states that the eight people gained access to classified 
areas and information, it does not give any specifics about this improper access, such 
as when it occurred, what information was accessed by whom, or what remedial action 
was taken. Once Applicant was informed of the proper way to input the NDA dates into 
JPAS, there were no further problems. Applicant has never had a security issue since 
then. The FSO no longer works for the company.3  
 
 In September 2008, the FSO interviewed Applicant about her NDA date entries. 
Applicant explained that she entered the data as she was trained to do. Applicant 
admitted to telling this to the FSO. The FSO’s incident report states that later in the 
interview, Applicant recanted her statement that she was trained to enter the dates early 
and further explained that she entered the dates early hoping the employees would 
come by and pick up their access badges. The report makes reference to an email from 
Applicant that describes her process for granting access; however, the email is not 
included in the report. Applicant denied making the recantation or of making any false or 
misleading statements to the FSO in September 2008. Later, in Applicant’s January 
2010 statement to a defense investigator, she again admitted to inputting the NDA 
dates based upon her training, but did not make any mention of doing so hoping the 
employees would come by to pick up their badges. I find Applicant’s testimony to be 
consistent with her earlier statement to a defense investigator and of greater weight 
than the FSO’s unsigned incident report.4 
 
 Applicant presented evidence of numerous awards, certificates, and recognition 
for her superior work in the security area. She was deemed a “Security Superstar” in 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 47-48, 50-51, 53-57, 59, 89; GE 3-4; AE 15-16. 
 
4 Tr. at 56, 59; GE 2-3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
2009 by the company’s director of global security. She was selected as employee of the 
month on two occasions. Additionally, through her efforts, the company received a 
commendable Defense Security Service (DSS) security rating, a first for the company. 
Her performance appraisals indicate that she is an outstanding employee. Overall, the 
documents submitted reflect professional service, leadership, high integrity, and 
outstanding performance over the course of Applicant’s career.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
5 AE B-C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all the Handling Protected Information disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 34 and determined the following apply: 
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
 Although the record lacks evidence indicating that there was an actual 
unauthorized disclosure, the possibility existed that eight people were given access to 
classified areas or information. Applicant admitted putting in NDA dates into JPAS 
before the employees signed the agreements because she was trained by her 
predecessor to do it that way. Both AG ¶¶ 34(a) and (g) apply. 
 
 All the mitigating conditions for Handling Protected Information under AG ¶ 35 
were considered and the following were found relevant under these circumstances: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant’s actions can be considered remote since they occurred in September 
2008. She has not experienced another security issue since that time. On the contrary, 
she has been recognized by her company for her outstanding service in the security 
area on numerous occasions. She provided convincing evidence to show that sufficient 
time has passed since the incident, that any security issues are unlikely to recur, and 
that her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are not in doubt. AG ¶ 
35(a) applies. 
 
 Once she was informed that she was inputting the NDA information incorrectly, 
she did not have any further incidents. Although her job, from that point on, did not 
involve making JPAS inputs, she was working on a regular basis with classified 
information and has not had any security issues. She has responded favorably to 
counseling. AG ¶ 35(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that she was not given proper training in the area of 
inputting NDA information into JPAS. She was actually trained to improperly input the 
information. Once discovered, corrections were made. She presented sufficient 
evidence to establish her training in this area was improper or inadequate. AG ¶ 35(c) 
applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
7 
 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
Applicant credibly testified that she did not give false or misleading information 
concerning inputting the NDA data to her employer when she was asked about it in 
September 2008. Her testimony is consistent with her previous statement given to an 
investigator. The Government did not establish a deliberate falsification or misleading 
statement. AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply. 
For the reasons stated under the Guideline K analysis above, the cross-alleged 
allegation at SOR ¶ 1.b is not supported by the evidence, because Applicant’s record 
supports a whole-person assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and 
other characteristics indicating she will properly safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 
16(c) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s actions 
occurred over three years ago without recurrence since then. I considered the lack of 
training, in fact, improper training, she received that led to the improper JPAS inputs. I 
also considered that she has been recognized for her outstanding work in the security 
field on numerous occasions since this incident. All of which demonstrate her 
permanent behavior changes toward security issues and the unlikeliest chance of 
 
8 
 
 
recurrence. Applicant met her burden and provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline K, Handling 
Protected Information and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
