 
 
1  
    
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of  ) 
  ) 
    ) ISCR Case No. 10-09773  
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines 
for financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Following Applicant’s submission of an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on February 21, 2010, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
 
 
2  
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.1 On August 19, 2011, 
DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which specified the 
basis for its decision: security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on September 19, 2011, 
denying 13 of the 14 allegations under Guideline F, as well as the two allegations 
under Guideline E. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 26, 2011, and I 
received the case on November 4, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 14, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 8, 2011. 
During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits. I admitted Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1 and 3 through 5 without objection. Applicant objected to GE 2, his 
responses to DOHA interrogatories, and I admitted GE 2 over Applicant's 
objection. He testified, offered the testimony of one witness, and did not offer 
exhibits. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2011. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
By memorandum dated October 26, 2011 (Hearing Exhibit I), Department 
Counsel amended the SOR to correct the amount of Applicant's 1994 tax debt 
alleged in subparagraph 1.b. The original amount of “$21,746.05” is amended to 
read “$37,786.15.” Applicant reiterated his denial of this allegation. (Tr. 8-9) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, 
and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, who is 72 years old, has been married since 1957 and has five 
adult children. He served in the Air National Guard from 1956 to 1962. He 
completed a bachelor’s degree in political science in 1970. He worked for a 
federal agency for 26 years, from 1957 to 1984. He held a security clearance 
during his federal employment. He testified that he was a security officer, with six 
years of information assurance experience.3
                                                     
1 See Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 (Tr. 16) After leaving the agency, he 
operated his own business from 1984 to 1989. He returned to civil service in 
1989. He worked at a federal agency where he assisted small businesses with 
2 Adjudication of the case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the 
guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 It is unclear whether this was an adjunct duty or another position. Applicant's security clearance 
application does not list a position as a security officer. 
 
 
3  
navigating the federal contracting process. He retired in 1994. Applicant has had 
at least two home businesses. Since 1969, he and his wife have run a product 
sales and distribution business. Applicant has also operated a home-based 
business as a sales consultant since 1994. He ran these businesses both during 
and after his federal employment. During his security interview in June 2010, he 
informed the security investigator that he has used several names for his 
business, he had not incorporated it, and he did not have a business license. 
Since February 2010, Applicant has been employed on an as-needed basis by a 
contractor as a trainer. His wife operates a daycare business. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 31, 
33, 35-36) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes federal income taxes for tax years 
1993 through 2009, excluding 1996, 1998 to 2000, and 2006. The total federal 
debt alleged is $122,600.25. Information on debts related to these tax years 
appear in Applicant’s interrogatory response. The SOR alleges that federal tax 
liens were filed in July and October 2006 for debts totaling $12,020.4
 
 It also 
alleges an unpaid state income tax lien of $2,314.34. Under the Personal 
Conduct guideline, the SOR alleges that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose 
the tax liens and the unpaid federal taxes when he completed his security 
clearance application in February 2010. (GE 2, 4) 
 Applicant's credit report of March 2010 lists two federal tax liens. One for 
$48,548 was filed in September 2002 in his state of residence, and in October 
2002 in his daughter’s state of residence. The lien was on a house owned by his 
daughter, and the mortgage loan was co-signed by Applicant's wife. He testified 
that he learned about the tax lien on his daughter’s house in 2002, shortly after it 
was filed. The second lien, for $9,058, was filed in October 2006. The credit 
report lists only one other past-due debt of $80 to a cell phone company. 
Applicant stated in his Answer to the SOR that he has paid the $80 debt, but he 
did not provide supporting documentation. Applicant's credit report of August 
2011 lists the July and October 2006 liens. Another federal lien for $6,927 is 
listed as filed in December 2010, but it is not alleged in the SOR. (GE 4, 5; Tr. 
45-50)  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied that he owes taxes for 1993, 1994 and 
1995, stating that the debts are “no longer owed.” He testified that he believes 
the IRS eliminated these tax years, and they “went over to the liens” because 
they did not appear on paperwork he received from IRS. However, the IRS 
document he provided with his interrogatory response shows total taxes due of 
$22,652 for 1993 and $28,123 for 1995.5
                                                     
4 The tax years for these two liens are not specified in the SOR. 
 He admits owing back taxes, but denies 
owing the specific amounts alleged in the SOR for tax years 1997, 2001 to 2005, 
 
5 Applicant submitted IRS documents with his interrogatory response of June 29, 2011. However, 
the IRS letters are incomplete, and it appears that single pages from several different IRS letters 
are included. It is therefore difficult to determine the dates of some of the correspondence, and if 
other relevant entries appeared on the pages that were not submitted. (GE 2)  
 
 
4  
and 2007 to 2009. He provided the amounts he believes he owes for each of 
these years, which total approximately $25,000. Applicant testified at the hearing 
that most of the debt comprises interest and penalties, and he believes the IRS 
would state his total tax owed to be about $150,000. (Answer; GE 2; Tr. 78, 86) 
 
 Applicant testified that he owes past income taxes because he completed 
his returns incorrectly for about 16 years. During his security interviews from April 
to June 2010, he stated that he needed to re-do these tax returns. He also stated 
that the errors arose primarily because of the changes in the type of deductions 
allowed for home businesses. He was audited in 1993, and some of his business 
deductions were disallowed. He testified that he learned how to do his returns 
correctly after the 1993 audit. He was audited again in 1994 and 1998. During his 
security interview, Applicant stated that he believed insufficient tax was withheld 
from his retirement income. He also said that, although he was aware of his tax 
problems, he was not aware that tax liens had been filed. Applicant provided a 
copy of a December 2010 notice of tax liens regarding tax years 2007, 2008 and 
2009. (GE 2, 3; Tr. 31-34) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant said the information he gave the investigator was 
incomplete because it did not include the fact that the IRS had determined 
Applicant and his wife were in a “non-collectible” status, meaning that they did 
not have the funds to pay their tax debts, and that the IRS would not seize funds 
from their federal retirement and Social Security annuities to pay the back taxes. 
Applicant did not provide documentation supporting his claim of non-collectible 
status. (Tr. 26, 29) 
 
 Applicant expressed concern at the hearing that the SOR was issued 
based on faulty information because he failed to reveal his “non-collectible” 
status during his security interview. However, on June 29, 2011, he was provided 
with an opportunity to review a summary of the interview and modify any 
information he believed to be inaccurate or incomplete. He did not add 
information about his non-collectible status. He signed a notarized statement that 
the information in the summary was “true and correct to the best of my 
knowledge and belief.” (GE 3) 
 
 Applicant has not filed his 2010 tax return, because filing the 2010 return 
would place his “non-collectible” status in jeopardy, and the IRS would again 
deduct funds from his and his wife’s Social Security and retirement checks. He 
testified that, “As soon as I send that return in, and report our facts, and we owe, 
the system cranks up and starts collecting money out of our checks again, and I 
don't want them to do that, so, that is why I haven't filed…” He does not want the 
IRS to collect funds while he is planning to negotiate the amount owed. (Tr. 82-
89) 
 
 Applicant has made several efforts to resolve his ongoing disagreements 
with IRS about his income and tax liability since 1993. He has been in touch with 
 
 
5  
the IRS personally. He retained a tax advocate who advised him on how to 
complete his returns. He also hired a tax attorney. He also hired a tax advocate 
who represented him in the local tax court. Applicant believes that this person 
misrepresented the help he could provide. In about 2006, the IRS began to 
deduct money from Applicant’s and his wife’s federal pensions and Social 
Security payments. He objected, and provided the IRS with information that 
resulted in a finding that they were “non-collectible.” He believes he is still 
required to file his tax returns. Applicant testified he is working with a certified 
public accountant. (GE 3; Tr. 32, 38-43, 52) 
 
 In summer 2011, Applicant contacted the IRS asking to negotiate a 
settlement that would remove the interest and penalties; he suggested that he 
pay a total of $25,344, which he based on numbers that he believed he had 
received from the IRS. He intended to set up a payment plan, despite his non-
collectible status. He testified that he was “moving to resolve issues while the 
clearance process was going on.” As of the hearing date, the IRS had not 
responded to Applicant's request. (GE 2; Tr. 29, 53-58) 
 
 Applicant and his wife’s monthly net income is $4,321. Applicant makes 
three debt payments per month, totaling $2,204. One payment of $1,800 per 
month is for a personal loan from an in-law of $300,000. After total expenses and 
debt payments of $4,335, he has a negative net monthly remainder of $14. (GE 
2; Tr. 29, 71) 
 
 Applicant’s security clearance application of February 2010 asked if a 
federal tax lien had been placed on his property in the previous seven years; it 
noted that obligations for which he was a co-signer should be included. He 
answered “No.” Applicant testified that he only knew about the 2002 lien on his 
daughter’s property, and it was not his property. The question about federal taxes 
asked if he failed to pay taxes, and if he failed to file tax returns. He answered 
“No” to the question because he had always filed his returns. He admitted at the 
hearing that he “mis-stated” the answer to that question. Applicant testified that 
he never hid the fact that he owed back taxes, because he disclosed it to the 
security investigator. (Tr. 49-50, 58- 63, 81-83) 
 
 Applicant's witness, a federal employee, testified that he has known 
Applicant for about four years and is aware that he has had issues with tax 
arrears. They have not worked together, and are not close friends. However, he 
testified that Applicant has never been dishonest with him. (Tr. 96-100) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
 
 
6  
policy in the AG.6
 
 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in 
¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does 
not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them 
as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to 
classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented 
by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative 
factors addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct).  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7
 
 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. 
Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a 
heavy burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access to classified information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each applicant possesses the judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect 
the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.9
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
                                                     
6 Directive 6.3 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
9 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7  
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations), and AG ¶19 (g) (failure to file annual Federal, state or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). 
 
The SOR alleges more than $100,000 in unpaid back taxes owed to the 
federal government, as well as a relatively small state tax debt. Applicant's 
current debts started becoming delinquent more than 15 years ago. His history 
demonstrates a failure to meet his financial obligations. In addition, Applicant 
admitted at the hearing that he deliberately failed to file his 2010 federal tax 
return.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 Applicant's debts have been accruing for years, but they are not in the 
distant past, as they remained unpaid as of the date of the hearing. His failure to 
come to any resolution over 18 years, despite professional assistance, indicates 
that his delinquencies may remain outstanding in the future, and raises questions 
as to his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 
8  
 AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on situations where events beyond an applicant’s 
control affect his ability to meet his financial obligations. It cannot be applied 
because nothing in the record indicates that unforeseen events prevented 
Applicant from meeting his tax obligations. He has been steadily employed for 
more than 40 years, including federal employment totaling 31 years. His self-
employment spanned from 1969 to the present.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 (c) and (d) require a good-faith effort to resolve debts. Applicant 
testified that he made attempts to resolve his tax debts. He testified the he 
contacted the IRS, and used intermediaries such as tax advocates and tax 
attorneys. However, he cannot receive mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) or (d). The 
record shows no evidence of consistent efforts by Applicant to resolve the debts, 
no evidence of concrete steps taken to reduce his debt through payments or a 
payment plan, and his tax delinquencies are not under control. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is 
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with 
the security clearance process. 
 
 The Government alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his true 
financial status, implicating the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.  
 
Applicant failed to report any financial issues on his 2010 security 
clearance application. He did not report that he had unpaid income tax debts, or 
that he had unpaid tax liens. Applicant was well aware of his tax delinquencies, 
as they had been ongoing for 18 years when he completed the application. His 
testimony that he was responding only to the part of the question regarding filing 
returns is not credible. At the time he completed his application in February 2010, 
he had not resolved his tax debts, yet he submitted a “clean” application, giving 
the Government no indication that delinquent taxes were an issue requiring 
further investigation. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 
 
9  
The following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
The record contains no indication that Applicant informed any authorized 
government official that he wished to correct the failure to provide truthful 
answers on his application. Although he discussed his debts with the investigator 
during his interviews, the Appeal Board has held that honesty at an interview 
does not negate the security implications of initial dishonesty on security 
clearance applications.10
 
 AG ¶17(a) cannot be applied. Applicant’s conduct 
cannot be considered minor because he failed to be forthright with the 
Government during a security clearance investigation. Applicant's conduct 
reflects poorly on his trustworthiness and judgment. AG ¶17(c) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate 
an applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented 
and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I 
have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the 
                                                     
10 ISCR Case No.02-23073 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar 20, 2004). 
 
 
10  
appropriate guidelines I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant has not demonstrated reliability in handling his tax obligations. 
He was not an inexperienced youth when the problems began in 1993, but a 
mature man of 54 years. After his first audit, 18 years ago, he knew how to 
complete his return correctly. However, he failed to correct the errors, and was 
audited twice more in 1994 and 1998. In the 12 years since the third audit, 
Applicant still has not resolved his tax delinquencies, and does not have a plan in 
place to do so. His lack of diligence toward his obligations to the government for 
many years is a serious concern and raises doubts about his trustworthiness and 
judgment. 
 
 Applicant's failure to be forthright by disclosing his tax debts on his 
security clearance application also raises serious concerns about his 
trustworthiness. It is highly unlikely that, despite hiring at least three professional 
tax advisors, Applicant was unaware of the multiple liens filed against him. Yet he 
did not disclose these liens, or his unpaid taxes, on his application. Disclosing his 
true tax status at his security interview does not mitigate his falsification on his 
security clearance application.  
 
 When the IRS initiated seizure of his retirement payments in 2006, 
Applicant took action to prove his inability to pay. The IRS accepted Applicant's 
evidence, and granted him “non-collectible” status. I note, in response to 
Applicant's concern at the hearing, that the SOR would have been issued even if 
he had discussed his non-collectible status during his security interview.  
 
 Applicant is now in a better position financially than when he was 
determined to be non-collectible. Rather than use that improvement to deal with 
his delinquencies, he has deliberately failed to file his 2010 tax return, in order to 
avoid disclosing his current finances, jeopardizing his non-collectible status, and 
becoming liable for his legitimate tax obligations. His willingness to disregard 
rules and regulations for his own benefit is incompatible with the high standards 
required of those who are granted security clearances.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
that Applicant has not satisfied the doubts raised about his suitability for a 
security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from the cited guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
11  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:    Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST Applicant  
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
