 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00781 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has siblings and extended family members that live in Afghanistan. 
However, he established deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States and he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. He mitigated the foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns 
raised. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted three security clearance applications (SCA), the most recent 
on December 12, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On June 8, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant answered the SOR 
on June 22, 2010, and requested a decision without a hearing. The Government 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Tr. 23) On October 6, 2010, the 
case was assigned to another administrative judge. At the time, Applicant was 
employed by a government contractor and deployed to Afghanistan in support of U.S. 
troops. Because he could not return to the United States, a video teleconference (VTC) 
hearing was scheduled for November 11, 2010. The VTC was cancelled because of the 
unavailability of a VTC facility in Afghanistan. The case was returned to the DOHA 
administrative section for conversion of the case to a decision without a hearing. 
On November 3, 2011, Applicant informed Department Counsel that he had 
returned to the United States, and requested an expedited hearing. (Hearing exhibit 
(HE) 1) The case was assigned to me on November 14, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing that same day, convening a hearing on November 15, 2011. At the hearing, the 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 16. GE 16 was not admitted, but was 
considered for purposes of taking administrative notice. Applicant testified, and 
presented exhibits (AE) 1 and 2. AE 2 was received post-hearing. All exhibits were 
made part of the record without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on November 21, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
On November 3, 2011, Applicant requested an expedited hearing. At his hearing, 
on November 15, 2011, he affirmed that he had sufficient time to prepare and was 
ready to proceed. He waived his right to 15 days advanced notice of his hearing. (HE 1; 
Tr. 24-25) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, with 
explanations. He denied the SOR allegations under ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, and 
having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered his testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 68-year-old linguist working for a government contractor in support 
of deployed U.S. military forces. Applicant, his first wife, his children, and his immediate 
and extended family members were born and raised in Afghanistan. From 1958 until 
1963, he attended a technical training school in Afghanistan and received a certificate of 
completion. He attended college in India for approximately one year during 1965-1966. 
Applicant served one year in the Afghan army in his early 20s, around 1967. 
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant has been married twice. He married his first wife in 1962, and they 
divorced in 1996. He has six adult children, ages 31 to 48, of this marriage. All of them 
were born in Afghanistan, but they are now naturalized U.S. citizens living in the United 
States. Applicant remarried in 1999. His wife was then a Bangladesh citizen living in the 
United States. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2006.  
 
When Applicant completed his December 2008 SCA, he indicated that his 38-
year-old son was an Afghan citizen living in the United States with a U.S. Permanent 
Resident Card (Green Card). (SOR ¶ 1.a) His son became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2009, and he is a U.S. resident.  
 
In 1979-1980, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan. Applicant fled Afghanistan 
afraid for his life. Two of his brothers and two cousins were killed between 1979 and 
1980, and many young Afghan men were being detained by the Soviets and never seen 
again. In August 1980, Applicant made the pilgrimage to Mecca and stayed working in 
Saudi Arabia for approximately eight years. He assumed financial responsibility for the 
wives of his two dead brothers and a dead cousin, as well as their combined 14-15 
children. All of them were living with Applicant’s wife and his children in Afghanistan. 
 
In April 1989, Applicant moved from Saudi Arabia to Pakistan, because the 
Saudis did not want to give him status as a refugee and advised him to move to 
Pakistan. He was in Pakistan around two months. During that time, he paid $10,000 for 
certain forged documents that allowed him to enter the United States illegally. Applicant 
was granted asylum, worked as a taxi driver for a number of years, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in January 1996. 
 
From 1999 until 2008, Applicant worked for a fast food restaurant and became 
manager of the store. In 2007, Applicant learned of the U.S. government need for 
linguists and applied for employment. He was hired by his current employer, a 
government contractor, in October 2008. Since then, he has been deployed twice to 
Afghanistan working as a linguist in support of deployed U.S. troops. As part of his job, 
Applicant accompanied U.S. Special Forces in patrolling missions and came under 
enemy fire on a couple of occasions. The Government conceded that Applicant placed 
himself in harm’s way. (Tr. 114.)  
 
Applicant’s rating indicates he has excellent language skills and capabilities. He 
displayed good work ethic, and exceeded his job performance requirements. He 
received a certificate of appreciation for his performance in support of a U.S. Special 
Forces Group. (AE 1) 
 
Applicant is very proud of his work for the U.S. forces. He considers himself to be 
a good, loyal American citizen, and he loves living in the United States. His current 
salary is approximately $150,000 a year. Applicant has no property or financial interests 
in Afghanistan. All of his financial and proprietary interests are in the United States. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant traveled to Afghanistan in 1992, 1996, 2003, 2004, and 2006-2007, to 
visit his siblings and extended family members living in Afghanistan. In 1992, he 
travelled to visit his wife, children, sister (65), stepbrother (75), and extended family all 
of whom were then living in Afghanistan. In 1992, he took $10,800 to Afghanistan. Of 
that money, $5,000 was his personal money, which he earned working as a taxi driver. 
The remainder was provided to him by Afghan friends living in the United States who 
asked him to take their money back to their families.  
 
From around 1989 until October 2008, Applicant sent money to his siblings in 
Afghanistan. Prior to October 2008, he had contact with his siblings, on the average, 
every two months. Applicant stopped having contact with and sending money to his 
siblings in October 2008. He explained that they no longer needed his financial support. 
Moreover, Applicant is afraid that if Taliban followers found out about his employment 
assisting U.S. forces, it could place his family members in Afghanistan in harm’s way. 
Applicant’s siblings have not worked for the Afghan government and have not been 
associated with the Taliban or other groups with interests inimical to the United States. 
He has not visited his relatives in Afghanistan since 2007.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant’s son’s mother-in-law is a citizen of Afghanistan 
living illegally in the United States in Applicant’s residence. Applicant’s documentary 
evidence established that the person in question was a naturalized German citizen 
when she entered the United States in 2003 with a valid U.S. visa. She is now a U.S. 
Green Card holder. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Afghanistan is located in 
Southwestern Asia and borders Pakistan, Iran and Russia. It has been an independent 
nation since 1919, after the British relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 
until a military coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In 1979, Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan. A 
resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, 
signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union, which 
ensured Soviet forces withdrew by February 1989. The resistance party was not part of 
the Accords and refused to accept it. A civil war ensued after the Soviet withdrawal. In 
the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to anarchy and the existence of 
warlords. The Taliban sought to impose extreme interpretation of Islam and committed 
massive human rights violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin 
Laden, al Qaida, and other terrorist organizations. 
 
 After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, demands to expel Bin Laden and 
his followers were rejected by the Taliban. U.S. forces and a coalition partnership 
commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power in 
November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004, after a popular 
election. Despite that election, terrorists, including al Qaida and the Taliban, continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues, 
because these terrorists target United States and Afghan interests by suicide 
operations, bombings, assassinations, carjacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this 
 
5 
 
 
time, the risk of terrorist activity remains extremely high. The country’s human rights 
record remains poor and violence is rampant. 
 
 Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence and increased attacks. 
Despite the loss of some key leaders, insurgents have adjusted their tactics to maintain 
momentum following the arrival of additional U.S. forces. It is suspected that the Taliban 
was most likely responsible for suppressing voter turnout in the August 2009 elections 
in key parts of the country. The Taliban’s expansion of influence in northern Afghanistan 
since late 2007 has made the insurgency a country-wide threat. 
 
 Afghan leaders continue to face the eroding effect of official corruption and drug 
trade. Criminal networks and narcotics constitute a source of funding for the insurgency 
in Afghanistan. Other insurgent groups and anti-coalition organizations also operate in 
Afghanistan. Insurgents have targeted non-government organizations, journalists, 
government workers, and United Nation workers. Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan 
frontier continued to provide al Qaida with leadership mobility and the ability to conduct 
training and operational planning, targeting Western European and U.S. interests. The 
United States Department of State has declared that the security threat to all American 
citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of the country is immune to violence.  
 
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
6 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  The government’s concern under AG ¶ 6 is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
7 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.3
 
 Applicant, by himself or through his family, had 
frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or obligation with his siblings 
and other extended family members who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. The 
extent of his close relationship is demonstrated by his frequent contacts, his providing 
financial support for relatives in Afghanistan, and his frequent travel to visit with his 
family in Afghanistan. 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Afghan agents, criminals, or terrorists 
operating in Afghanistan may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States. With its negative human rights record, its government, and the violent 
insurgency that operates within the Afghan borders, it is conceivable that Applicant’s 
family members could be vulnerable to coercion.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
                                            
3  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s contacts in Afghanistan 
were not casual, infrequent, or minimal. However, his last visit to Afghanistan was in 
2007. Since October 2008, Applicant has avoided contacting his relatives in 
Afghanistan, and stopped sending them financial assistance. Specifically, he is 
concerned that, if members of the community became aware of his current occupation, 
it may place his family members at unnecessary risk.  
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Afghanistan’s form of government.4
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship 
of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives and extended family 
members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Afghanistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists, criminals, or governmental entities in that country.  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
                                            
 4 The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
9 
 
 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or criminals from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, his siblings, or other relatives living in Afghanistan. However, we cannot rule 
out such a possibility in the future. There is evidence of insurgency operations being 
conducted in Afghanistan against American forces. There is also evidence that 
Afghanistan has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. The conduct of 
terrorists in Afghanistan makes it more likely that terrorists would attempt to coerce 
Applicant through his relatives living in Afghanistan, if they determined it was 
advantageous to do so. This places the burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk, and he is not in 
a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and his 
connections to family members. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his family members living in 
Afghanistan. Applicant left Afghanistan in 1979-1980. His wife and children immigrated 
to the United States in the mid-1990s. He was granted asylum in 1989. He has made 
the United States his home since 1989, and has been a productive U.S. citizen since 
1996. Applicant, his current wife, and his children have established strong connections 
to the United States. His wife and all of his children are citizens and residents of the 
United States. All of his financial and property interests are in the United States. He is 
doing well living the American dream, and has demonstrated that his loyalties are to the 
United States. 
 
In 2008, Applicant volunteered to assist the United States in its war against 
terror. He has been working for a government contractor supporting U.S. troops 
deployed to Afghanistan, and in the process he has placed himself in harm’s way. He is 
considered to be an excellent linguist and a valuable employee. Additionally, since 
October 2008, Applicant has avoided contact with his relatives living in Afghanistan. 
There is no evidence that he has compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified information 
 
In cases of this nature, an additional analysis is necessary. The Appeal Board 
has stated: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
 
10 
 
 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to 
the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation.5
 
 
Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan twice since October 2008. As a result of 
his duties accompanying U.S. Special Forces, he was placed in high-risk circumstances 
while supporting U.S. troops. According to the evidence presented, he complied with the 
security procedures and regulations.  
 
Considering Applicant’s actions under dangerous circumstances in conjunction 
with his age, his 23 years living in the United States (16 as a U.S. citizen), his wife and 
six children being U.S. citizens and residents, and all of his financial and proprietary 
interests are in the United States, the evidence supports a determination that his ties 
and sense of obligation to the United State are sufficiently strong that he could be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States, even under 
circumstances detrimental to his relatives in Afghanistan.6
 
 On balance, and considering 
the evidence as a whole, Applicant mitigated the Guideline B security concerns. 
Concerning the Guideline E allegation, the record evidence established that the 
allegation is unsubstantiated. Applicant’s son’s mother-in-law entered the United States 
as a German citizen with a U.S. visa. She is currently a U.S. Green Card holder, legally 
residing in the United States. AG ¶ 17(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-
person analysis. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s ties and sense of 
obligation to the United State are sufficiently strong that he could be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States, even under circumstances 
detrimental to his relatives in Afghanistan 
 
                                            
5 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. May, 30, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-
12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006).) 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006). 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
