 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-04821
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to disclose any of his many criminal arrests in the security clearance
application he submitted in August 2008. He has numerous delinquent debts that remain
unsatisfied. Clearance is denied. 
On August 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline
F (financial considerations). Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on
August 24, 2011. He admitted all SOR allegations except subparagraph 2.t, and he
requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued
on November 8, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 5, 2011. The hearing was
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted eight documents that were marked
as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-8 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted 11 documents that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-11
and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on December
14, 2011.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 35-year-old man who has been employed as a steward assistant
merchant mariner since January 2001. He works under contracts that generally last about
four months duration, and he is then unemployed until he is offered another contract. As
of the date of the hearing, Applicant had not worked since January 2011. He quit high
school during his freshman year, but he received a general educational development
diploma in June 1994. Applicant is single and he has no dependents.
In June 2005, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana and money
laundering (a felony) after the vehicle he was attempting to drive across the border into
Mexico was stopped by border patrol agents. Upon searching the vehicle, the agents
discovered marijuana residue, $16,000 cash, and 100 condoms. Applicant’s explanation
is that he had been picked up by two friends driving his mother’s car after he left the ship
on which he had been working and one of those friends threw a marijuana cigarette into
the trunk area of the car when they were stopped. He claims the $16,000 was the salary
he had been paid for his work on the ship. Applicant entered a plea of guilty to the money
laundering charge and was placed on three years probation. His probation was terminated
after he successfully completed about 18 months of the sentence.
In August 1996, Applicant was charged with selling crack cocaine (a felony),
possessing crack cocaine (a felony), and resisting arrest without violence. He describes
himself as a “drug dealer wanna be” at the time. According to Applicant, he had loaned his
pager to his friend “Slippery” who was video-taped selling crack cocaine to an undercover
police officer. The police thereafter called the pager and converged on a basketball court
where Applicant was located. Applicant claims he decided to plead guilty to a drug offense
out of fear that he would be killed if he identified the real drug dealers. He was sentenced
to serve six months in jail.
In May 1995, Applicant was charged with a felony offense of carrying a concealed
weapon. Applicant’s version of this offense is that he was the passenger in a vehicle that
was involved in a minor accident with a vehicle driven by a woman. The woman made an
obscene gesture and cussed at Applicant and the driver and then drove off. They followed
the woman and when Applicant opened the glove compartment in search of paper and
pencil to record her license plate number a gun fell out or the compartment and into his lap
just as they pulled alongside her vehicle. She reported the incident to a police officer who
was stopped nearby and Applicant was arrested. The charge was dismissed.   
3
In April 1995, Applicant was charged with trafficking in crack cocaine (a felony) and
possession of marijuana. Applicant’s version of this offense is that his friend set him up by
sprinkling cocaine and marijuana in his vehicle and then apparently notifying the police
where the drugs could be found. The charges were dismissed. 
 
In September 1994, Applicant was charged with the felony offense of forgery. His
version of this offense is that someone gave him a stolen check as payment for a car
stereo. He did not know the check was stolen and was arrested when he attempted to cash
it at a bank. The charge was dismissed.
Applicant signed and submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on August 5, 2008. In response to questions asking if he had ever been
charged with or convicted of a felony offense, a firearms offense, or an offense related to
drugs, Applicant answered “No.” He provided rambling and unclear explanations for his
failure to disclose his multiple arrests, including that he actually filled out a different form
from the e-QIP, provided it to someone who then returned the e-QIP to him which he
executed without fully reading. His explanations for not disclosing the 2005 arrest and
conviction included that he was not properly represented by his attorney and a second
attorney told him after he was convicted that he was going to meet with the judge and get
the charges dropped. His explanations also included that because the arrests did not occur
within the preceding seven years and he had not been convicted he did not think he was
required to disclose the offenses.  
Applicant’s credit reports disclose 12 delinquent medical debts, owed in the
combined amount of $11,684. Applicant attributes the largest of those debts to his
underage girlfriend, who was pregnant with his child, having a miscarriage. He took her to
the hospital and because she was underage he had to sign for her to receive treatment.
He claims the girls mother agreed to pay the medical bills but has not done so. 
Applicant’s credit reports disclose eight other delinquent debts, owed in the
combined amount of $18,799. Those debts include credit card debt, utility charges, and a
repossessed automobile. Applicant submitted proof he settled one debt that was owed in
the amount of $1,000. He submitted documentation that he has entered into a contractual
agreement with a debt settlement organization under which he is to make 36 monthly
payments in the amount of $243 that are to be applied to satisfy the five debts listed in the
agreement, owed in the combined amount of $10,949. Applicant testified, without
submitting any proof, that he has made the required payments under the plan since he
opened the account with the company in May 2011. However, he is unaware if the
company has made any payment toward any of his debts. 
The debts listed in Applicant’s credit reports have been delinquent for many years.
He testified he did not have the funds to make payments on those debts earlier because
he was repaying his mother $26,000 she loaned him to pay his legal fees, and he gave his
sister $16,000 to open a beauty salon that has now gone out of business.    
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline F (financial
considerations), with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant in this
case. 
 The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of5
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant6
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
5
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest
is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process
or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (Adjudicative
Guideline [AG] 15)
Applicant failed to disclose multiple arrests, including felonies, firearms-related, and
drug-related offenses in the e-QIP he submitted in August 2008. Included in those arrests
were a drug offense for which he served six months in jail, and a felony charge that
occurred just three years before he submitted the e-QIP and for which he was sentenced
to three years probation. Applicant’s multiple explanations for not disclosing his criminal
history are not credible. Disqualifying Condition (DC) 16(a): deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies. I have considered all
mitigating conditions and conclude none apply.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . . (AG 18)
Applicant has accumulated numerous delinquent accounts, owed in the combined
amount of over $30,000. Most of those accounts have been delinquent for many years. DC
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting
financial obligations apply.
Several of Applicant’s larger medical debts were caused by his underage girlfriend’s
miscarriage of their child. Applicant claims the girl’s mother has reneged on her agreement
to pay those medical bills. However, he has done nothing to satisfy the debts himself, take
action to attempt to compel the girl’s mother to satisfy the debts, or otherwise dispute them.
Accordingly, I conclude that MC 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances does not apply.  
Applicant has satisfied one debt and he entered into a contractual agreement with
a debt settlement organization that is supposed to resolve a number of his other delinquent
debts. He claims to have made the required payments under that program, but he failed
6
to submit proof of those payments. In the event he does fully comply with the requirements
of the program, it will be another two and one-half years before those debts are satisfied.
Further, a large number of Applicant’s delinquent accounts are not included in the program.
Accordingly, I conclude the following mitigating conditions do not apply: MC 20(a): the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; and MC 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. The remaining mitigating conditions
have no applicability to the facts of this case.
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the
personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns. He has not overcome the
case against him nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline E and Guideline
F are decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.t: For Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

