KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant had two previous discharges in bankruptcy and twelve delinquent debts
currently.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-08508.a1
DATE: 01/04/2012
DATE: January 4, 2012
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-08508
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 13, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On September 6, 2011, after considering
the record, Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant contends that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because her
financial difficulties stem from bad timing, numerous illnesses and loss of supplemental support.
Applicant’s argument does not demonstrate that the Judge erred in reaching his adverse decision.
  
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of
fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence
outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-08308 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov.
3, 2011).
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a lengthy history of not meeting financial
obligations.  In 1996 and 2005, she had received Chapter 7 discharges in bankruptcy.  At the time
the case was submitted for decision, she had 12 delinquent debts, totaling approximately $18,000,
from collection or charged-off accounts, and had presented no documentary evidence showing that
she had paid, settled, reduced the balance owed, or otherwise resolved those debts.  Decision at 2-3
and 5-7.  The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He noted that Applicant’s financial problems were due, in part, to the
various circumstances she had explained, and that those circumstances were largely beyond her
control.  He also noted that she was making some effort, via financial counseling, to put her financial
house in order.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why that mitigating evidence was
insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns in light of the totality of the record
evidence.  Id. at 6-7.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
3
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  The Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
