 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02608 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeffrey Walsh, Personal Representative 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on May 11, 2009. On March 11, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations; Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, to Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 5, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and initially requested a decision 
be made on the administrative record. He later changed his mind and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
April 21, 2011. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on October 24, 
2011, and transferred to me on October 31, 2011. On that same date, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for November 17, 2011. The case was 
heard on that date. The Government offered seven exhibits which were admitted as 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 7. Applicant testified, called four witnesses and offered 
six documents which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – F. The record was 
held open until December 1, 2011, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. 
He timely offered an additional exhibit that was admitted as AE G. Department 
Counsel’s response to AE G is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The transcript was 
received on November 27, 2011.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old network administrator for a Department of Defense 
contractor. He has worked for the defense contractor since September 2006. He is 
applying for a security clearance for the first time. He has an associates degree in 
information technology. He is a Microsoft certified system Engineer. He has an 11-year-
old son from a prior marriage. He is currently engaged to the mother of his three 
daughters, ages 4, 17 months, and 4 months. (Tr at 46, 80; 108-109; Gov 1; Gov 3 at 3)  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
When he was 12 years old, Applicant joined a local gang. He became involved in 
criminal activity and illegal drug use. On October 21, 1995, he was arrested and 
charged with Attempted Homicide – Assault with Firearm on Person. During his 
background investigation interview on June 22, 2009, Applicant explained that he was 
standing with some of his fellow gang members on a street. A rival gang drove past 
them. One of his fellow gang members pulled out a .38 cailber revolver and fired two to 
three shots towards the rival gang members. Applicant claims he did not have the gun, 
but could not recall who did the shooting. About three days after the incident, Applicant 
was arrested. The police told him that they had a witness who told them that he was the 
shooter. Applicant was in jail for 11 months pending his court case. He was tried as an 
adult.  He pled guilty to Assault with a Deadly Weapon. He was sentenced to one year 
in jail with credit given for time served. Applicant told the investigator conducting the 
background investigation that he was not the shooter, but did not want to “rat” on a 
fellow gang member. When he was released from jail he was ordered to serve three 
years probation.  (Tr. 73-74; Gov 3 at 5-6)  
 
In November 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of 
marijuana and probation violation. This offense happened while Applicant was a high 
school student. A teacher found a baggie of marijuana in Applicant’s shoe. He was 
found guilty in juvenile court and sentenced to six months in juvenile hall. He was 
expelled from high school. (Gov 3 at 10) 
 
In January 1997, a fellow gang member stole a car. He gave the car to Applicant 
to drive. Applicant and several of his fellow gang members drove the car around. A 
police car attempted to pull him over. Applicant attempted to evade the police. The 
 
3 
 
 
police pursued his car.  Applicant was stopped and arrested when he drove down a 
one-way street. He was charged with Grand Theft Auto and Evading Police. Applicant 
pled guilty. He was sentenced to four years in prison. He served three years and three 
months in prison. He was released from prison in 2000. (Tr. 81; Gov 3 at 7) 
 
In August 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of 
Marijuana. He was pulled over by police after he had made an illegal left turn. When the 
police officer asked him to get out of the car, a rolled cigarette fell out of the car. He pled 
guilty to the charges and was fined $350 for the offense. (Tr. 81; Gov 3 at 10) 
  
Applicant has had no criminal arrests since August 2000. He is currently 
attempting to have his criminal record expunged. (Tr. 18, 82) 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Applicant started using marijuana when he was 14. He used marijuana about 
once or twice a week.  He began to use cocaine when he was 17 years old. He used 
cocaine about every other day until he was arrested for Grand Theft Auto in 1997. The 
drugs were provided by neighborhood friends or he occasionally purchased drugs for 
his own use.  He never sold drugs. (Gov 3 at 11) 
 
 In 1997, Applicant was introduced to heroin while serving time in prison. Friends 
he made in prison provided him heroin. He ingested the heroin through his nose. He 
occasionally bartered for heroin by providing food or grooming supplies. Heroin was 
easy to get in prison. He used heroin about once every two to three days. He would get 
sick if he was not using heroin. When he was released form prison in 2000, he stopped 
using heroin for about one year. He started using again about every two to three days. 
He began to inject heroin. His use increased to twice a day. He became more 
dependent on it and would purchase heroin from various dealers. (Gov 3 at 7) 
 
 Applicant’s family suspected Applicant was using drugs. They contacted his 
parole officer and suggested that he drug test Applicant. He tested positive for heroin. 
His parole officer enrolled him in a three-month inpatient drug treatment program.  
Applicant attended this facility some time between 2001 and 2003. He successfully 
completed the program and was released from parole in 2003. He stayed drug free for 
six months, but began to use heroin again. He used about two times a day. He used 
heroin consistently until 2005. He was having issues with his mother. One night, he 
asked God for help and for strength to turn his life around and get off heroin. He had a 
conversation with his mother and voluntarily began to attend the facility where he 
completed his drug program. The facility allowed former patients to drop by and speak 
with counselors and fellow drug addicts. (Tr. 84-86; Gov 3 at 8) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant also voluntarily attended Narcotics Anonymous meetings. He 
met his sponsor at these meetings. With the help of his sponsor, and on his own 
initiative, he turned his life around. He initially attended meetings daily. He now attends 
meetings on Saturday mornings. He has not used illegal drugs since 2005, but will 
 
4 
 
 
always consider himself an addict. He does not intend to use drugs again. (Tr. 86-88, 
101-102, 107; Gov 3 at 8)     
  
Financial Considerations  
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he has the following 
delinquent accounts: a $299 medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 6 at 
1; Gov 7 at 1); a $250 medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5 at 1; 
Gov 6 at 1; Gov 7 at 1); a $1,499 account placed for collection in May 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
2 at 5; Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $6,643 credit card account placed for 
collection in May 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 8; Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2; Gov 
7 at 2); and a $183 cell phone account placed for collection in November 2008. (SOR ¶ 
1.e: Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2; Gov 7 at 2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $14,338 debt owed after a car 
repossession in 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 4 at 15; Gov 5 at 2; Gov 6 at 2); a $315 account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g); a $307 checking account debt placed for collection in 
May 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 2 at 6; Gov 4 at 14), and a $202 cell phone account placed 
for collection in June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 4 at 16). 
 
Not alleged in the SOR, was a total of $14,661 in delinquent student loans. 
Applicant entered a rehabilitation program which was successfully completed on August 
7, 2010. He is now making payments on his student loans. (Gov 2 at 7)  
 
The following is a summary of the current status of Applicant’s delinquent 
accounts: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a, $299 medical collection account: Applicant testified that his health 
insurance should have paid this debt. He is pursuing the matter through his insurance 
company. (Tr. 75-76) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $250 medical collection account: Applicant testified that his health 
insurance company should have paid this debt. He is pursuing the matter through his 
insurance company. (Tr. 75-76) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $1,449 collection account: In October 2011, Applicant agreed to pay 
the collection company $30 a month towards this collection account. The current 
balance on the account is $1,509.32. The first payment was due on October 13, 2011. 
Payments are due on the 16th of each month. Applicant testified that he will make 
payments for six months. Then he will negotiate a higher payment with the collection 
agency. No documents were provided verifying that he made the payments. (Tr. 77; AE 
B at 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d, $6,643 collection account: In October 2011, Applicant agreed to pay 
the collection company $50 a month towards this collection account. The current 
balance on the account is $6,413.16. Payments are due on the 16th of each month. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant testified that he has been making payments for quite some time towards this 
account. No documents were provided verifying that he is making the agreed payments. 
(Tr. 77-78; AE B at 2-3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $183 cell phone collection account: Applicant is in the process of 
attempting to contact the creditor to make payment arrangements. (Tr. 78) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, $14,338 car repossession collection account: Applicant testified he is 
working with the company to negotiate a settlement. Status of debt at the close of the 
record is unresolved. (Tr. 79-80) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g, $315 collection account: Applicant testified that this is resolved. He 
provided the initial payment agreement. On March 25, 2011, he agreed to pay three 
$100 payments on March 18, 2011, April 1, 2011, and April 15, 2011. He did not provide 
proof that he made these payments. (Tr. 78; AE D) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h, $307 checking account collection account: The debt was paid on 
March 15, 2011. (Tr. 78; AE C)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, $202 cell phone collection account: Applicant is in the process of 
making payment arrangements on this account. Status of debt at the close of the record 
is unresolved. (Tr. 78)  
 
When Applicant responded to financial interrogatories on September 23, 2010, 
he provided a personal financial statement. He listed his net monthly salary as 
$2,830.52. His fiancée’s net monthly salary was $2,400.  Combined their net monthly 
income is $5,230. His expenses include: rent $1,100, groceries $800, clothing $100, 
utilities $750, car expenses $1,000, medical $40, child support and daycare $750 and 
miscellaneous $400. His total monthly expenses were $4,640.54. His total monthly debt 
payments were $284. Applicant had $305 left over each month after expenses. During 
the hearing he testified that he is current on his federal and state taxes. (Tr. 108; Gov 2 
at 3) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant’s fiancée testified that she handles the finances. 
She believes that their finances are in good shape. Applicant cleared up his driving 
record and paid his parking tickets. He is current on his student loan payments. Their 
net monthly income is currently $5,500. Their monthly expenses include: rent $1,120, 
utilities $600, $580 car payment, $270 tuition for daughter’s school, diapers $100. (Tr. 
50 – 65)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history and drug use are cross-alleged under the personal 
conduct concern.  In addition, in October 2005, Applicant was charged with driving a 
motor vehicle with no license plates and an expired registration. In September 2006, he 
 
6 
 
 
was charged with operating a motor vehicle with a suspended license. (Gov 3 at 6) 
Applicant presented proof that his traffic violations are resolved. (AE F)  
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Applicant’s fiancée testified during the hearing. She has known him for eight 
years. They met at work. They have been together for seven years and have lived 
together for five years. They set a wedding date for June 9, 2012. She is aware of 
Applicant’s criminal history and drug abuse. He has gone from being lost to setting an 
example. He is a good person and an amazing father. He is her best friend. He no 
longer associates with his past friends and they are active in their church. The church is 
a steadying influence in their lives. (Tr. 46-56; AE A at 2) 
 
 Applicant’s friend and personal representative testified on his behalf.  He is a 
practicing attorney. He is a member of Narcotics Anonymous (NA) and a recovering 
drug addict. He has been clean for seven years. He met Applicant when he entered the 
NA program in 2006. He got to know Applicant as a very genuine and caring person. 
Applicant is determined to stay clean. Members of NA work diligently on changing their 
lives and character. He sees Applicant on a regular basis and has observed him 
working the steps. Applicant has also helped him relocate his law practice. Applicant  
helped him repair and adapt the computers in his law office. He sees Applicant every 
week at NA meetings. He is not the same person and has changed his life. Addicts 
have to want to get clean and it takes work. You have to work the program. He believes 
Applicant works the program. In 2008, he attempted to help Applicant expunge his 
criminal record. He was advised Applicant would have to wait longer because of the 
seriousness of his crimes. Ten years have passed and Applicant is now in the process 
of applying to expunge his criminal record. (Tr. 14-24; AE A at 5) 
 
 Applicant’s NA sponsor testified during the hearing. He has been a member of 
NA for 25 years. He has known Applicant for five years. He helps Applicant work the 12 
steps. Applicant’s transformation from who he was when he entered the program to who 
he is today is “miraculous.” Applicant recently celebrated five years of sobriety. His 
sponsor states that Applicant is a “poster child” for NA. In a letter dated November 17, 
2011, Applicant’s sponsor notes that he has watched Applicant “transition to a 
responsible member of Narcotics Anonymous and society.” He worked very hard to 
accomplish an amazing growth. Applicant is a loving, devoted husband and father of 
three children. He has successfully maintained a job to support his family for almost five 
years. He helps with Spanish speaking members of NA on the phone line. He also 
volunteers to help others with their computer challenges when he has spare time. He is 
always willing and ready to assist whenever needed. He strongly trusts Applicant. (Tr. 
33-42; AE A at 1, 3) 
 
 Applicant’s regional manager wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He highly 
recommends Applicant for a security clearance. He notes Applicant can work 
independently and follows through to ensure the job gets done. He is flexible, reliable, 
and trustworthy. Applicant has consistently continued his education and has grown 
 
7 
 
 
professionally in the company. Applicant is a tremendous asset to the company and has 
his highest recommendation. (AE A at 4)  
 
 Applicant provided favorable performance reviews from 2010 and 2011. He 
became a Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer on December 30, 2009. (AE G)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
8 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c), (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. The SOR alleges and the Government proved by 
substantial evidence that Applicant has nine delinquent debts, an approximate total 
balance of $23,986.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept, 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. The majority of 
his delinquent accounts remain unresolved. While Applicant maintained that several of 
his debts are resolved, he did not provide proof that the debts were paid or resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.h) Proof was provided that he paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
He recently entered into payment agreements for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.d.  It is too soon to conclude that he will follow the terms of the repayment 
agreements. He testified that debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h was resolved. He provided a 
copy of the repayment agreement, but no proof that the debt was paid in full. The 
 
9 
 
 
remaining accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.i) are not resolved. Questions remain about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment based on his financial 
situation. 
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. While Applicant has several 
periods of unemployment – some of the periods of unemployment occurred during the 
period that he was still using heroin. This was a self-induced problem as opposed to a 
circumstance beyond his control. While Applicant is beginning to resolve several of his 
accounts, several of his accounts remain unresolved. Considering that the balances on 
six of the delinquent debts were $315 or less, Applicant could easily have resolved 
these accounts between the time he was interviewed in conjunction with his background 
investigation in September 2010 and the date of the hearing on November 17, 2011.   
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. Applicant has several 
unresolved delinquent accounts. While he testified that he was in the process of 
resolving the accounts, he did not provide evidence verifying the steps that he has 
taken to resolve each account. It is unlikely that his financial situation will be resolved in 
the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. It may 
apply with respect to SOR ¶ 1.h, but Applicant did not provide documentation verifying 
the debt was resolved. He recently entered into repayment agreements with the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. It is too recent to determine whether Applicant will follow 
through with the agreed upon payments. He also provided no proof to corroborate his 
assertions of payments even though the record was held open to allow him the 
opportunity to do so. While he testified that he is resolving the remaining accounts, a 
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient to demonstrate a good-faith effort towards 
resolving one’s debts.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the Criminal Conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the AG: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
There are three Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions which apply to 
Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses);  
 
AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted); and  
 
AG ¶ 31(d) (conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial 
of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year).  
 
Applicant was convicted of serious offenses in October 1995 and January 1997. 
He served three years and three months in prison for the Grand Theft Auto conviction in 
1997. Marijuana possession charges in November 1996 and August 2000 are also 
considered in Applicant’s criminal history. His illegal drug use from age 18 to 2005 is 
also considered in his criminal history. Although Applicant’s last criminal arrest occurred 
in August 2000, he continued to abuse illegal drugs until 2005.      
   
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions are relevant to Applicant’s 
case: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); and  
 
 AG ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement). 
 
Considering his history of criminal conduct, Applicant has a substantial burden to 
overcome the concerns raised under criminal conduct. While his past serious criminal 
conduct raises cause for concern, his criminal conduct ended in 2005 when he stopped 
using drugs. He has had no arrests since 2000. It has been six years since he has 
committed a criminal offense (i.e. illegal drug use). He demonstrated that he is a 
responsible citizen. He has worked for the same company for six years and gets 
favorable performance reviews. He is in a committed relationship and is a responsible 
family man. He actively works on maintaining his sobriety. Both AG ¶ 32(a) and ¶ 32(d)  
apply to Applicant’s cases. When the illegal drug use ceased, the criminal conduct 
ceased. Criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. Applicant has demonstrated that he is 
successfully rehabilitated.  
 
11 
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG &24:       
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. The following Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions are relevant:  
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse); and  
 
AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant admits to a 14-year history of illegal drug use. At age 14, he began to 
use marijuana. At 17, he began to use cocaine. He began to use heroin while in prison. 
He continued to use heroin after he was released from prison in 2000 until 2005. He 
admits to being a drug addict.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. I find two apply to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation). 
 
Applicant has been drug free for over five years. The testimony of his fiancée, his 
friend/personal representative, and his sponsor verify that he has been clean since 
2005. They also attested to the fact that he actively works the NA program. While his 
history of illegal drug use was quite lengthy, his five-plus years of sobriety reinforce that 
his illegal drug use no longer casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. Applicant no longer associates with his drug-using associates and 
contacts. He is an active member of NA and is proactive in taking steps to insure that he 
remains drug free. He has been drug free for five years.    
 
12 
 
 
 The drug involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal Conduct concerns are raised because of Applicant’s criminal history, 
history of drug abuse, and traffic offenses. The following disqualifying conditions are 
raised under personal conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information); and 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing... ). 
  
 The following Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); 
 
AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur); and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).  
 
13 
 
 
 While Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, drug abuse, and traffic offenses 
raises concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness, he has made great progress in 
turning his life around. Once he became serious about stopping his drug abuse, his life 
became more manageable. He is active in NA and works the 12-step program to 
maintain his sobriety. He has been drug free since 2005. There is no evidence of 
criminal conduct since that time. While some of his offenses were very serious, he 
appears to have rehabilitated himself. He is now a mature, responsible family man. He 
fully disclosed his unfavorable history during his background investigation. He no longer 
associates with members of his former gang.    
   
 Security concerns raised under Personal Conduct are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is 
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the 
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant mitigated concerns about 
his past criminal history, drug abuse and personal conduct. However, questions remain 
under financial considerations. Applicant has several unresolved debts which creates 
doubts about his ability to protect classified information. In cases where there is doubt, 
the doubts must be ruled in favor of national security. Applicant has resolved some of 
his debts, but did he not show a specific plan for resolving his remaining debts. A 
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient to demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve 
debts. At this time, Applicant has not met his substantial burden of proof to mitigate the 
concerns raised under financial considerations.     
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h - 1.i:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.f:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.h:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a – 4.d:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
