KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to
take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 10-07016.a1
DATE: 01/27/2012
DATE: January 27, 2012
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-07016
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 8, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
2
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On November 30,
2011, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline C are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.    
Applicant was born in Taiwan, marrying in the early 1980s.  He and his wife immigrated to
another country a year later.  Applicant became a citizen of that country in the mid-1980s.  He
subsequently moved to the U.S. and became a citizen of this country in the late 1990s.  His wife also
became a citizen of the other country and of the U.S., although the dates cannot be determined from
the record.
Applicant’s wife has relatives in Taiwan.  Her father is retired from the Taiwanese military
and a sibling works for a research institute.  Applicant and his wife own property in Taiwan worth
about $600,000, and they have a Taiwanese bank account worth about $190,000.  Although
Applicant claimed that his ties with his in-laws were minimal, there is insufficient evidence as to
the extent of his wife’s ties to them.  Applicant applied for and received a Taiwanese passport after
he became a U.S. citizen.  He used the passport, although he recently surrendered it to his facilities
security officer.  It has since been destroyed.   Applicant has expressed some feelings of allegiance
to Taiwan and has stated that he was considering retiring there.  Applicant understands that a benefit
of Taiwanese citizenship is access to the health care system in that country.  In an interview, he
expressed some feeling of allegiance to Taiwan, because it is the country of his birth.  
Taiwan has been identified as participating in criminal espionage.  It has been involved in
cases involving illegal export or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted dual-use technology.  The
People’s Republic of China maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan. 
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the Guideline B
security concerns raised by his ties to Taiwan.  She stated that Applicant did not provide enough
information to resolve these concerns.  Additionally, she noted a statement that Applicant had made
to 2010 to the effect that he was unwilling to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. 
Applicant contends that he submitted information about the sale of his Taiwanese property
that did not make it into the record.  However, Applicant was advised of his right to submit matters
in response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM), with his response due no later than October
22, 2011.  Applicant responded to the FORM by letter dated September 24, 2011.  In this letter he
did not request an extension of time in which to submit additional material.  His appeal brief avers
that he mailed the information about the sale of his property on November 28, 2011, two days before
the date of the Judge’s decision.  Although pro se applicants cannot be expected to act like lawyers,
they are expected to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03743 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 24, 2011).  Under the circumstances, this
3
information constitutes new evidence, insofar as it was submitted after the close of the record.  We
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. (“No new evidence shall be
received or considered by the Appeal Board”).  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusions regarding his in-laws.  Here, too, he presents
new evidence the Board cannot consider.  The Judge’s analysis is consistent with prior Appeal
Board rulings that there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties with or obligations to the
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-07436 at fn. 5
(App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2011).   
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
