 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00816 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 25, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and did not request a hearing. 
He later changed his mind and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 16, 2011. The case was assigned 
to another administrative judge on August 26, 2011, and transferred to me on October 
25, 2011. That same date, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
November 15, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the 
Government offered six exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 
6. Applicant testified and offered four exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A - D. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 27, 2011.  Based upon a 
 
2 
 
 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d and 
admits all the remaining SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old air conditioning mechanic employed by a Department 
of Defense contractor, who seeks a security clearance. He has worked for his current 
employer since April 2009.  He is single and has three children, ages 23, 21, and 16.  
(Tr. 23-26, 42; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he has 18 delinquent 
accounts, an approximate total of $42,357. Of that amount, $9,992 was for tax liens and 
$9,173 related to an automobile repossession. He owed a tax lien in the amount of 
$7,041 for tax years 1995, 1996, and 1997. He owed another tax lien in the amount of  
$2,951 owed for tax years 2006, 2008, 2009, and 2010. (Gov 2; Gov 3; Gov 5; Gov 6; 
Response to SOR, dated May 26, 2011).  
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant provided a letter indicating that he retained a 
law firm to help him negotiate resolutions for his debts in October 2010. Applicant 
offered the same letter during the hearing. It was admitted as AE A. Initially, Applicant 
was able to afford his monthly payments to the law firm. He eventually was unable to 
make the payments when his child support payments increased. After he left the 
agreement with the law firm, he researched filing for bankruptcy, but decided it was too 
expensive. (Tr. 34 – 36; AE A)  
 
Applicant owes a significant amount of child support arrearages for his three 
children. While not alleged in the SOR, his child support obligation is one of the reasons 
why he is unable to pay his bills. On January 1, 2009, Applicant’s total child support 
arrearages was $79,801. On February 1, 2010, the total arrearages was $85,143. The 
arrearages increased because of interest.  Applicant testified that his financial problems 
began in 1988 because he could not afford his child support payments and pay his 
other debts. (Tr. 27, 46; AE C) 
 
The two tax liens resulted because Applicant was unable to pay his taxes. 
Applicant provided proof that the $7,041 tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was resolved. 
(Tr. 29-30; Response to SOR, AE B) Applicant entered into a payment agreement with 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for the remaining tax debt. He agreed to pay the IRS 
$50 a month. (Tr. 31-32, 43; AE B) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant admitted he never contacted any of the other 
creditors alleged in the SOR. He has not attended financial counseling courses. He has 
not had an active credit card account since 1998. He does not have additional debts 
that were not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 36, 38, 41) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s net monthly pay is $2,000. He rents a room from a co-worker for $550 
a month. He does not own a car. He pays $100 monthly towards gas, electricity, and 
cable. He estimates that he has $250 left over each month after expenses. (Tr. 38 – 40)   
 
Applicant’s site manager wrote a letter on his behalf. She indicates Applicant is a 
trustworthy employee who occasionally is the acting section lead. He is responsible and 
dependable. Applicant also provided numerous awards, certificates of achievement, and 
training certificates that he earned during his career. (AE D) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a 
history of financial problems. He admits to having financial problems since 1988, the 
year his oldest child was born. The SOR alleged 18 delinquent accounts, an 
approximate total of $42,357.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
 
5 
 
 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. While he resolved one of his federal tax 
liens, he has a considerable amount of unresolved debt.  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. While Applicant has a large 
child support arrearage, which he claims prevents him from paying his bills, paying 
support is something that was within his control. Considering the amount of the 
arrearages, Applicant did not pay child support for a number of years. Although he is 
now paying child support, he neglected his duties to pay child support in the past, which 
was not responsible behavior.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not received financial counseling. He has no plan in place 
to resolve his delinquent debts.   
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the $7,041 federal tax lien alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. He agreed to pay the IRS $50 a month towards the $2,952 tax lien alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. However, he did not provide proof that he was consistently making 
payments towards this lien. Applicant retained a law firm to assist him with resolving the 
accounts but was unable to make the payments so the agreement was discontinued. He 
researched filing for bankruptcy, but determined it was too expensive. While Applicant 
has a large monthly child support payment, he has made little effort to resolve his 
remaining delinquent accounts.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable 
recommendation of his site manager and the awards and decorations that he has 
received. Applicant has a long history of financial problems. While he now has a well-
paying job, his child support payments have increased with his income. Applicant 
accumulated significant child support arrearages. If he had paid his child support 
dutifully, he would not be in the position that he is in at the present. Most of Applicant’s 
delinquent accounts are unresolved. Security concerns are not mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e – r:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
