 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 10-09907                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                    Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 1, 2010. On July 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s notarized answer to the SOR was received by DOHA on October 12, 
2011. He elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on November 29, 2011. I convened a hearing on January 6, 2012, to 
 
2 
 
 
consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced 
seven exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 7 and admitted to the record without 
objection. Applicant testified, called no witnesses, and introduced four exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through D and admitted to the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 10, 
2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 18, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all four allegations. Applicant’s admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant, who possesses a Bachelor of Science degree in computer science 
and a master’s degree in business management and practical theology, is 57 years old 
and the father of two adult children. In 1980, he enlisted in the U.S. military, where he 
served on active duty for 20 years. In March 2000, he received an honorable discharge. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 18-19.)  
  
 Applicant was married for the first time in 1976. He and his first wife divorced in 
1984. In 1985 or 1986, Applicant experienced financial problems related to the debts 
from his first marriage, and he filed for bankruptcy. (Ex. 1; Ex.2; Tr. 43-44.) 
 
 Applicant married his second wife in 1987. In 1990, Applicant’s home was 
foreclosed upon when he was unable to make his mortgage payments. The property 
was sold, and Applicant’s debt was satisfied. (Ex. 2; Tr. 44.)   
 
 In 1980 and in 1995, during his military service, Applicant was awarded security 
clearances. In 2008, Applicant took a position as a senior cost schedule analyst with a 
government contractor. His current employer is now sponsoring him for a security 
clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 18-19, 43.) 
  
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling approximately $78,777. The 
alleged debts and their amounts are: SOR ¶ 1.a. ($33,778); SOR ¶ 1.b. ($1,863); SOR 
¶ 1.c. ($12,259); and SOR ¶ 1.d. ($30,877). 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) about his financial situation in June 2010, he told the 
investigator that he did not recognize a delinquent credit account debt of $1,863, which 
had appeared on his June 2010 credit bureau report. He told the investigator that he 
would try to find out more about the debt, and if it was his, he would pay it. This debt is 
alleged on the SOR at ¶ 1.b. Before the hearing, Applicant contacted the creditor and 
satisfied the debt. Applicant provided evidence to corroborate that the debt had been 
satisfied. (Ex. 2; Ex. 5; Ex. 6; Tr. 44.)  
 
3 
 
 
 In 2008, Applicant’s daughter established a beauty salon business. Applicant told 
the OPM investigator that to help his daughter finance the business, he acquired a 
credit card, which he allowed her to use for her business expenses. When the business 
failed, Applicant’s daughter was unable to pay the debt accumulated on the account. 
Applicant made a few payments on the credit card account, but the account was 
referred for collection. This debt is alleged in the SOR at ¶ 1.c. In his personal security 
interview, Applicant estimated that his last payment on the account occurred in 2009. 
However, he provided a letter from the creditor, dated October 31, 2011, corroborating 
that the debt had been settled in full.  (Ex. 2; Ex. 7; Tr. 45.) 
 
 Applicant provided credible evidence that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 
1.c. had been satisfied in full. At hearing, the Government conceded that only the debts 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d. remained of security significance. (Ex. 6; Ex. 7; Tr. 44-
45.) 
 
  Applicant told the OPM investigator that he opened the credit card account 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. in 1999. He used the card to pay expenses associated with his 
daughter’s beauty salon business. He acknowledged the debt as his, and he told the 
investigator that he planned to satisfy the debt in full in the future. He provided a letter 
he wrote to the creditor, dated September 26, 2011, reciting his several attempts to 
contact the creditor’s agents and expressing his willingness to resolve the account. (Ex. 
2; Ex. A; Tr. 40-41.) 
 
 Applicant also acknowledged responsibility for the delinquent debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.d. The debt arose when he and his wife purchased a time-share property in 
2005 or 2006. Applicant stated that he stopped making payments on the property in 
2008. (Tr. 46-46.) 
 
 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d. total approximately $64,655. Applicant 
stated that he does not have payment plans in place for the two debts, but he plans to 
pay them at some unspecified time in the future by using proceeds from his 401k plan. 
Applicant claimed he was ill-advised by a financial counseling service he retained, and 
he dismissed the counselors who were assisting him. (Tr.35, 48-49.) 
 
 In April 2011, Applicant provided a personal financial statement. The statement 
showed his gross salary was $4,351 per month. He reported that his wife’s net monthly 
salary was $936. He also reported that he received $1,500 each month in military 
retirement pay. (Ex. 3.) 
 
 On his personal financial statement, Applicant also reported $1,205 in monthly 
living expenses and $5,048 in monthly debt payments.1
                                            
1 Applicant reported a monthly first mortgage payment of $3,692 and a monthly second mortgage 
payment of $464. He also reported a monthly automobile payment of $562, a planned payment of $150 
each month to the creditor identified at SOR ¶1.a., and a payment of $180 each month on a credit union 
loan. (Ex. 3.)  
 His monthly net remainder was 
$534. (Ex. 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant stated that his financial situation had changed. He was 
no longer employed. He reported that his monthly income consisted of a $900 stipend 
from the church where he served as a part-time pastor and an estimated $1,600 in 
military retirement pay. He stated that his wife’s salary was $2,000 a month.2
 
 (Tr. 51-
53.) 
 Applicant reported the following monthly living expenses: first mortgage payment, 
$3,200; second mortgage payment, $464;3 electricity, $174; car payment, $562;4
 
 
automobile insurance, $110; and food, $150. Applicant stated that he had financial 
credit counseling when he was serving in the military. (Ex. 3; Tr. 52-58.) 
                                                       Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                            
2 It is not clear from the record whether the $2,000 figure for Applicant’s wife’s salary represents her 
gross or her net monthly income. 
 
3 Applicant stated that he lacked sufficient income to pay his second mortgage in December 2011. (Tr. 
60.) 
 
4 Applicant stated that he had only one car payment remaining until his automobile debt was paid in full. 
(Tr. 55.) 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
 
6 
 
 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant merits credit for resolving two of the delinquent debts in the SOR. 
While he admitted his financial delinquencies, it was not clear that he understood his 
financial problems or how to resolve them. He attributed some of his financial difficulties 
to the failure of his daughter’s beauty salon business in 2008 and to what he considered 
to be bad advice from a financial counseling service he retained. However, Applicant 
failed to demonstrate that he acted responsibly in the face of the financial setbacks he 
described. He stated that he plans to resolve his two large financial delinquencies at 
some unspecified future date. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the 
Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her 
outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
1999).  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties which began in at least 1986, 
when he declared bankruptcy. The two unresolved delinquent debts in the SOR total 
approximately $64,655. Both delinquencies date to at least 2008. He currently lacks 
sufficient income to pay his monthly living expenses. His financial problems are ongoing 
and recent. He has no plan in place to respond to future financial contingencies. I 
conclude that, while AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part to Applicant’s case, none of the 
remaining Financial Consideration mitigating conditions is applicable to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated and 
mature person of 57 years. His current financial problems began at least four years ago, 
before his recent unemployment. To his credit, he resolved two of the four debts alleged 
in the SOR. However, he remains financially overextended and appears to lack 
sufficient funds to meet his monthly expenses and pay his debts. Applicant’s current 
unstable financial situation raises concerns about his judgment and potential financial 
vulnerability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment and his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:            Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b. - 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
