 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00949 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 1, 2011, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on September 16, 2011. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on November 21, 2011. Applicant 
submitted documents that were marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E and 
admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on January 19, 2012. The 
Government exhibits included in the FORM are also admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He is a high school graduate. He is married with three minor 
children, an adult child, and two adult stepchildren.1  
 
 Applicant has had financial difficulties for a number of years. He and his wife filed 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in September 2002, and their debts were discharged in 
December 2002. Applicant stated that the bankruptcy was necessary because he and 
his wife lost their jobs.2 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in April 2004. The bankruptcy was 
dismissed in June 2006 because of material default in plan payments. Applicant stated 
that his car was wrongly repossessed in the early 2000s. He was able to obtain the car 
back from the finance company. Upon an attorney’s advice, he filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in order to place the car payments under the control of the bankruptcy 
court.3  
 
 The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts, 5 unpaid judgments, and Applicant’s 
bankruptcies. All of the debts and judgments appear on at least one credit report. 
Applicant admitted owing the $2,379 judgment that was filed in January 2005, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q. He also admitted owing the $461 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s and 
the $100 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w. He admitted partial responsibility for the $12,214 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He denied owing the remaining debts.4  
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy records indicate that, when the bankruptcy 
was dismissed, he owed more than $11,000 to the finance company that held his car 
loan. SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a $12,214 judgment awarded to the company that financed the 
car loan. Applicant admitted that the finance company obtained a judgment of about 
$12,000 against him, but he stated the judgment is being paid by wage garnishment. He 
submitted a pay statement showing that his wages are garnished $336 per pay period. 
The recipient of the garnishment is not identified in the pay statement.5  
 
                                                          
1 Items 5-7.  
 
2 Items 4, 6-10; AE A, E. 
 
3 Items 4, 6-9, 11; AE A, E.  
 
4 Items 4, 6-9; AE A, E. 
 
5 Items 4, 11; AE A, B, E.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant shares the same name as his father, and he stated that debts are 
inaccurately listed on his credit report. In December 2010, he retained a law firm “to 
assist him in disputing negative and false reports and/or entries that are currently 
contained in [his] credit bureau reports.” He also subscribes to a credit monitoring 
service. The law firm disputed all the debts in the SOR that Applicant denied owing. 
Several debts were deleted from Applicant’s credit report, including the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.v, and 1.x. The names of the creditors and collection companies for the 
other debts that have been deleted from Applicant’s credit report do not directly 
correlate to any of the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, 1.t, 
and 1.u allege medical debts without naming the creditor.6 Without knowing the name of 
the creditor, I am unable to determine whether these are valid debts. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e allege judgments of $3,350 and $3,419 awarded to the same 
plaintiff. Applicant stated that the two judgments are duplicate and inaccurate entries on 
his credit report. The judgments appear to represent different suits, because the credit 
report lists different case numbers. I will give Applicant the benefit of the doubt and 
consider it to be one lawsuit. SOR ¶ 1.k alleges a delinquent $5,090 debt to a collection 
company on behalf of a creditor with a name that is similar to the name on the 
judgments. The 2011 credit report lists this as a $3,409 debt, with a $5,090 balance.7 
This appears to be the underlying debt that resulted in the judgment against Applicant. 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g (medical debt - $885), 1.l (cable/Internet 
provider - $1,886), 1.n (bank - $1,293), 1.o (collection company - $200), and 1.p (car 
loan - $5,692) are listed on the April 2011 credit report. The judgment and debt alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.r (judgment - $1,301) and 1.y (insurance company- $490) are listed on the 
September 2009 credit report, but not the April 2011 credit report.8 
 
 Applicant stated that his financial issues resulted from the loss of his job and a 
loss of income. He worked in real estate for a period, but he left the business when the 
real estate market slowed and then collapsed. He stated that he was “trying to work out 
payments” for his debts. Except for the garnishment addressed above, he submitted no 
evidence of payments toward any of his delinquent debts.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Items 4, 6-9; AE C-E.  
 
7 Items 4, 6-9; AE E.  
 
8 Items 8, 9.  
 
9 Items 4, 6, 7; AE A, E.  
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant successfully disputed a number of debts, including those alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.v, and 1.x. SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, 1.t, and 1.u allege medical debts 
without naming the creditor. Without additional information, I am unable to determine 
that these are valid debts. The judgment and debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.r and 1.y are 
listed on the September 2009 credit report, but not the April 2011 credit report. The two 
judgments and the debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.k represent the same debts. I 
find that AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debts and judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 
1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.r, 1.t, 1.u, 1.v, 1.x, and 1.y.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002 after they both lost their 
jobs. He may have had some additional periods of unemployment, and he lost income 
from his real estate activities when the real estate market collapsed. These events were 
beyond Applicant’s control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  When the debts I gave Applicant credit for under AG ¶ 20(e) are eliminated, there 
remain three judgments and seven delinquent debts that are Applicant’s responsibility. 
The total amount owed on those accounts was in excess of $28,000. Applicant 
established that his wages are being garnished $336 per pay period. He did not submit 
evidence of how long the garnishment has been in effect or the balance due on the 
judgment. He did not submit proof of payments of any other debt.   
  
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant acted responsibly 
and made a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely 
to recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable to the judgment that is being paid by 
garnishment. It is not applicable to any of the other debts. I find that security concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant has a history of financial 
problems, including a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, a Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was 
dismissed because of material default in plan payments, and a number of delinquent 
 
7 
 
debts and unpaid judgments. The limited information in the record has not convinced 
me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n-1.q:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.t-1.v:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.w:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.x-1.y:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
