 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09636 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally possessed and used marijuana from December 2009 until May 
2010, while working for a government contractor and holding a secret security 
clearance. I find that not enough time has passed to establish that Applicant’s use of 
drugs is unlikely to recur. His recent behavior casts doubt on his reliability and 
judgment. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
After receiving information about Applicant’s drug-related misconduct, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary finding1
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On June 15, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on July 5, 2011, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
September 9, 2011. Applicant requested a hearing in November 2011. (Hearing exhibit 
(HE) 1) DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 16, 2011, convening a hearing 
for November 3, 2011. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented two witnesses, 
and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 14, 2011. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old software programmer working for a Government 
contractor. He has never been married and has no children. In the summer of 2007, 
Applicant received an internship and started working for his employer while attending 
college. He received his bachelor’s degree in computer science in 2008, and accepted a 
permanent position with his employer.  
 
Consequent with his internship, on June 29, 2007, Applicant submitted a security 
clearance application (SCA). He was granted access to classified information at the 
secret level in September 2007, and held the clearance until late May 2010, when it was 
withdrawn. During Applicant’s security clearance application process, his employer’s 
facility security officer (FSO) provided Applicant training about his responsibilities and 
obligations as a security clearance holder. Applicant was informed of the company’s 
policy against the use of drugs, and of the possible adverse consequences that could 
result from the use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. Applicant knew 
that marijuana is a controlled substance, and that the possession and use of marijuana 
is prohibited by law. 
 
Applicant illegally possessed and used marijuana from around December 2009 
until May 2010. During that period, he purchased marijuana three to four times, 
spending between $40 and $50 to purchase around three and one-half to seven grams 
of marijuana each time. He claimed that he purchased the marijuana from an 
acquaintance of a college friend. Applicant used marijuana once or twice a day, every 
few days each week. At the time, he was living with a co-worker. Applicant testified he 
smoked the marijuana in the bathroom to hide his use of marijuana from his co-worker. 
However, during his August 2010 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
told the investigator that he smoked marijuana at dinnertime. (GE 2) Applicant denied 
any use of marijuana prior to December 2009 or after May 2010. He also denied ever 
using any other illegal substances.  
 
In May 2010, Applicant drove his car to purchase marijuana from his provider. 
After he purchased the marijuana, a police officer stopped him for a traffic violation. 
During the stop, he and his car were searched using a police dog, and the dog found 
marijuana in Applicant’s possession. Applicant was charged with possession of 
marijuana. He pled guilty to possession of drug paraphernalia. He was sentenced to 
one year unsupervised probation and to pay a fine and court costs. At the time of his 
misconduct, Applicant held a security clearance at the secret level. 
 
Approximately two weeks after his arrest, Applicant told his FSO and his 
supervisor about his illegal drug-related misconduct and the pending criminal charge 
against him. He testified that he also informed his parents, brother, and some of his 
friends about his questionable behavior and criminal charge. The FSO withdrew 
Applicant’s security clearance and reported Applicant’s misconduct to the Government.  
 
Applicant testified he used marijuana because he was under a lot of work-related 
stress caused by working 50- to 60-hour weeks. He told the investigator that he used 
marijuana recreationally for stress reduction and to alleviate boredom. Applicant averred 
that his most recent use of marijuana was in May 2010. Since then, he has not been in 
contact with his dealer, whom he believes was convicted of drug-related offenses. 
Applicant claimed he does not associate with any other illegal drug users, except for his 
older brother. According to Applicant, his brother has used marijuana since high school, 
and he is a habitual marijuana user. Applicant’s brother used to smoke marijuana in 
front of Applicant. Applicant claimed he only has contact with his brother approximately 
twice a year, mostly during the holidays. Applicant informed his brother of the charges 
against him, and of his intent to never use illegal drugs again.  
 
In October 2011, Applicant sought counseling from a state-licensed professional 
counselor. After an hour-long interview, the counselor concluded that Applicant’s six-
month drug use was situational and not symptomatic of a personality or mood disorder. 
In her opinion, Applicant does not have a current substance abuse disorder, and the risk 
of a future substance abuse relapse is low. She believes that as a result of her one-hour 
counseling session, Applicant has a better understanding of his stressors and triggers 
and he is now equipped with tools and techniques for dealing with them in more healthy 
and constructive ways. (AE 2) Applicant submitted a written statement of intent to 
refrain from any illegal drug activity, and consented to the automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any violation. (AE 1) 
 
Applicant’s FSO and direct supervisor testified at his hearing. They have known 
Applicant and have observed his performance during the last three years. Applicant is 
considered to be a valuable employee with an outstanding performance record. He is 
dedicated, reliable, and demonstrates technical proficiency. Except for the misconduct 
alleged in the SOR, Applicant has not been involved in any other misconduct. His 
 
4 
 
 
performance safeguarding classified information and following rules and regulations has 
been otherwise exemplary.  
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5 
 
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant possessed and used marijuana from December 2009 until May 2010. 
He purchased and used marijuana at age 23, while possessing a security clearance at 
the secret level. He knew that his possession and use of marijuana was illegal, and that 
his drug-related behavior would adversely affect his ability to retain his job and to 
possess a security clearance. He promised to never use illegal drugs again. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise security concerns in this particular case: AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse,”3
 
 
AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase,” and AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.”  
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
                                            
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
illegal possession and use of marijuana is recent and frequent. He used illegal drugs 
after he was hired by his current employer and while in possession of a security 
clearance. He was aware of the illegality of his actions and the adverse consequences 
he would face because of his misconduct. 
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since May 2010. He received professional 
counseling to help him avoid the stress and triggers that caused him to use marijuana. 
He also claimed he has implemented some lifestyle changes to help him remain 
abstinent. Notwithstanding, his favorable evidence is not sufficient to establish that he 
has implemented permanent lifestyle changes to prevent his future use of illegal drugs. 
He continues to have some association with his drug-using brother.  
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find there has not been a sufficient 
period of abstinence. Not enough time has passed for me to conclude that his 
questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s past questionable behavior still 
casts doubt on his reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the 
law. His favorable evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to fully mitigate the Guideline H 
security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant illegally purchased and used marijuana for approximately 
six months while working for a defense contractor and possessing a secret security 
clearance. He stopped his questionable behavior because of his criminal prosecution 
and the withdrawal of his security clearance.  
 
7 
 
 
 
In light of Applicant’s age, his years working for a government contractor while 
holding a security clearance, and the recency of his drug use, his promise to not use 
illegal drugs in the future is not sufficient to establish his questionable behavior is 
unlikely to recur. At this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
