 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )        ISCR Case No. 10-06824     
                                                                      )                                                                                                                                              
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David P. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in this case, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Her eligibility for a security clearance 
is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on May 6, 2010. On March 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 25, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
her case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 20, 2011. The FORM contained documents 
 
2 
 
 
identified as Items 1 through 7. In addition, the Government compiled facts about 
Taiwan from 13 official U.S. government publications1
 
 and requested that I take 
administrative notice of those facts. By letter dated August 17, 2011, DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM, which included the factual summary containing information about 
Taiwan, to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or 
objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on August 19, 2011. Her 
response was due on September 18, 2011. 
Applicant did not submit any information within the time period of 30 days after 
receiving a copy of the FORM. On October 7, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.) and six allegations that raise security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.f.) In her Answer 
to the SOR, Applicant admitted one Guideline C allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and denied two 
Guideline C allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.) She admitted all six Guideline B 
allegations. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 In June 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about her citizenship status, her 
possession of a foreign passport, her foreign national contacts, and her foreign travel. In 
October 2010, she also responded to interrogatories sent to her by DOHA, and she 
                                            
1 The documents cited by the Government in its recitation of facts about Taiwan and the PRC are as 
follows: Office of the National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage – 2008, dated July 23, 2009; Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial 
Espionage – 2000; Statement of Facts, United States v. Keyser, Case No. 1:05CR543, in the United 
States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, dated December 12, 2005; United States 
Attorney’s Office, Eastern District of Virginia, Former State Department Official Sentenced for Mishandling 
Classified Material, dated January 22, 2007; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and 
Commerce, California Exporter Fined in Connection with Attempted Taiwan Export, dated September 30. 
1999; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Commerce, Commerce Department 
Imposes Civil Penalty on Minnesota Firm in Settlement of  Export Violations, dated December 20, 2001; 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Commerce, Connecticut Company Settles 
Charges Concerning Unlicensed Pump Exports to China, Taiwan, Israel, and Saudi Arabia, dated July 28, 
2003; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Commerce, Encore Corporation Settles 
Charges of Export Control Violations, dated January 26, 2004; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Commerce, Parker Hannifan Corp. Settles Charges Pertaining to Illegal Exports to Taiwan 
and China, dated November 17, 2005; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and 
Commerce, Defendants Indicted on Charges of Conspiracy to Export Controlled Items, dated August 19, 
2005; United States v. Ching Kan Wang and Robin Chang, Case No. 05-60218-CR-SEITZ/001 
(S.D.FLA.), Superseding Indictment (filed October 6, 2005) and Judgment in a Criminal Case (filed March 
7, 2006); U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Commerce, Taiwan Exporter Arrested 
and Charged with Exporting Missile Components from the U.S. to Iran, dated February 4, 2010; and 
Interagency OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS), Interagency Threat Handbook, [Unclassified/For Official Use 
Only], June 2004. 
 
3 
 
 
provided certified photocopies of her most recent Taiwanese and U.S. passports. (Item 
6; Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old, married, and the mother of two adult children. She is 
employed by a government contractor as a backend database developer. She seeks a 
security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. In 1984, she came to the United States 
to join her husband, a citizen of Taiwan, and to pursue full-time graduate study. The 
couple’s first child was born in the United States in 1985. Soon thereafter, Applicant 
returned to Taiwan with her infant daughter and left the child in the care of her mother. 
In her June 2010 personal subject interview, Applicant stated that she and her husband 
were unable to care for the child while they were pursuing full-time graduate studies. 
(Item 6.)  
 
 In 1986, Applicant earned a master’s degree at a U.S. university. In 1996, 
Applicant and her husband, who is an information technology specialist, became 
naturalized U.S. citizens. In 2007, Applicant acquired a U.S. passport. In 2008, 
Applicant applied for and was issued a Taiwanese passport, which will expire in 2018. 
On her e-QIP and in her personal security interview in June 2010, Applicant identified 
herself as a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States. On her e-QIP, Applicant also 
stated that she had surrendered her Taiwanese passport to her employer’s facility 
security officer on May 6, 2010. The record does not contain documentation from the 
employer’s facility security officer confirming that she has possession of Applicant’s 
Taiwanese passport. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied she exercised dual citizenship, since 
she no longer possessed her Taiwanese passport. However, in her security interview, 
Applicant stated she was not sure if her employer would return the passport to her if she 
were to leave and seek employment elsewhere. Applicant said she wanted to retain her 
Taiwanese passport if at all possible to make it easier to travel back to Taiwan.2
 
 (Item 
6.) 
 Applicant told the investigator that she also wished to claim dual citizenship 
because she will be eligible to retire in six years, and she and her husband may decide 
to return to live in Taiwan during their retirement. She opined that she and her husband 
could live well in Taiwan as the result of their U.S. income, savings, and retirement 
benefits. Applicant stated that she and her husband had not decided to retire to Taiwan, 
but she did not want to foreclose that option for them by giving up her dual citizenship. 
Applicant also said that if her dual citizenship prevented her from acquiring a security 
                                            
2 Applicant explained that if she used her U.S. passport to travel to Taiwan, she was required to submit 
additional documentation to extend her visa and her stay beyond 30 days. If she used her Taiwan 
passport to travel to Taiwan, however, she could stay as long as she wished and was not required to 
bring and to submit additional documentation to extend her visa. (Item 4; Item 6.)   
 
 
4 
 
 
clearance, she would give serious thought to relinquishing dual citizenship status. (Item 
6.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, who is retired, is a resident and citizen of Taiwan. Applicant 
speaks with her mother once a month on the telephone. She returns to Taiwan about 
once a year to visit her mother. Applicant’s mother-in-law is also a resident and citizen 
of Taiwan. Applicant speaks with her on the telephone every three months, and she 
visits her once a year when she returns to Taiwan. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s two brothers and two sisters are also residents and citizens of 
Taiwan. Applicant speaks on the telephone with one of her brothers, a warehouse 
employee, twice a month, and she visits him in Taiwan about once a year. Applicant 
does not speak on the telephone with her other brother, an insurance employee, but 
she visits him in Taiwan approximately once each year. One of Applicant’s sisters is 
retired; the other sister’s occupation is not identified in the record. Applicant speaks on 
the telephone once a month with one of her sisters, and she speaks on the telephone 
every other month with her other sister. She visits both sisters about once each year 
when she returns to Taiwan. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to Taiwan in 2004, 2007, and November 2008. The SOR 
alleged that Applicant used her Taiwanese passport to travel to Taiwan in 2008. 
Applicant denied the SOR allegation and asserted that she carried both her U.S. and 
her Taiwanese passports when she traveled to Taiwan in November 2008. (Item 1; Item 
4.) 
 
 Applicant also visited the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in 2003, 2004, 2006, 
2007, and 2008. She stated that these trips were for leisure and sightseeing, and she 
used her U.S. passport when visiting the PRC. She stated that since both Taiwan and 
the PRC have a common language, Mandarin Chinese, communication was not difficult 
for her. (Item 4; Item 6.) 
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Taiwan, as provided by 
the Government in the FORM: 
 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage lists Taiwan, along with seven other countries, as 
being involved in criminal espionage and export controls enforcement 
cases in 2008. The 2000 version of that report specifically lists Taiwan as 
being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information and highlights specific incidents wherein Taiwan engaged in 
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
 
There have been various cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Taiwan, including: 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Classified materials; 
Laser gun aiming devices/sights; 
Measuring probes controlled for nuclear non-proliferation and national 
security reasons; 
Centrifugal pumps that are controlled for chemical and biological weapons 
and anti-terrorism reasons; 
Metal organic vapor disposition tools controlled for national security and 
anti-terrorism reasons; 
Fluid control valves that are controlled for national security, foreign policy, 
non-proliferation or anti-terrorism reasons; 
Radio communication encryption modules; 
Missile components shipped to Iran by way of Taiwan. 
 
The PRC’s Ministry of State Security is the “preeminent civilian 
intelligence collection agency in China,” and it maintains intelligence 
operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with 
Taiwan connections.  
 
(FORM at 3-6; footnotes and citations omitted.) 
Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. To meet its burden, the Government must establish by substantial evidence a 
prima facie case that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest for an applicant 
to have access to classified information. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a 
security clearance, the applicant carries a heavy burden of persuasion. The "clearly 
consistent with the national interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable 
doubt about an applicant's suitability for access to classified information in favor of 
protecting national security. 
 
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
6 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                         Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. She became a U.S. citizen in 1996, 
and she acquired a U.S. passport in 2007. In 2008, she acquired a Taiwanese passport, 
 
8 
 
 
which she possessed up until the time she completed her e-QIP in May 2010. She 
carried the Taiwanese passport and her U.S. passport when she traveled to Taiwan in 
November 2008. Acquiring and using a Taiwanese passport after becoming a U.S. 
citizen raises a concern that Applicant actively exercises dual citizenship with Taiwan 
and suggests a preference for a foreign country over the United States. I conclude that 
Applicant’s conduct raises potentially disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶10 
(a)(1). 
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign passport 
might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”  
 
Applicant claimed dual citizenship on the e-QIP she completed in May 2010 and 
in her personal security interview in June 2010. After becoming a U.S. citizen in 1996 
and acquiring a U.S. passport in 2007, she acquired a Taiwanese passport in 2008 and 
carried it, along with her U.S. passport, when she traveled to Taiwan in November 2008. 
She carried the Taiwanese passport so that she might use it, if necessary, to extend her 
stay in Taiwan without filing a request for an extension of the visa she acquired under 
her U.S. passport. Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant’s use of her 
Taiwanese passport for this purpose had been approved by a cognizant security 
authority. However, when she was interviewed by an authorized investigator, she stated 
she would like to retain her dual citizenship with Taiwan so she might retire in Taiwan. 
She also stated that she would be willing to renounce her dual citizenship in order to 
obtain a security clearance. She reported on her e-QIP that she had surrendered her 
Taiwanese passport to her employer’s facility security officer in May 2010; however, the 
record contains no credible evidence from the facility security officer confirming that she 
has taken possession of Applicant’s valid Taiwanese passport. Applicant stated that she 
hopes to have her Taiwanese passport returned to her when she leaves her present 
employer.  
 
When Applicant acquired her Taiwanese passport in 2008, she was 55 years old 
and a U.S. citizen. The record demonstrates that Applicant is ambivalent about her dual 
citizenship and has a preference for Taiwan. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), and 
11(d) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. Additionally, I conclude that that AG 
¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply only in part in mitigation to the facts of her case. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline. Applicant’s close contacts and relationships with family members who are 
citizens and residents of Taiwan raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”  
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  
 
 Two additional Guideline B allegations also raise security concerns. While the 
United States and Taiwan share common democratic values, Taiwan is known to be an 
active collector of U.S. economic and proprietary information that could assist in 
strengthening its defensive position, and it has targeted U.S. government organizations 
in order to acquire U.S. technology. American citizens with immediate family members 
who are citizens or residents of Taiwan could be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, 
 
10 
 
 
inducements, or pressure by those seeking to acquire proprietary or otherwise restricted 
U.S. technology for the benefit of Taiwan. American citizens of Taiwanese background 
who travel to Taiwan are also possible targets for exploitation by the PRC’s Ministry of 
State Security. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, mother-in-law, two brothers, and two sisters are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. Applicant communicates with several of her family members 
regularly by telephone, and she visits all of her family members about once yearly when 
she travels to Taiwan. 
  
 Applicant’s relationships with her mother, four siblings, and her mother-in-law are 
neither casual nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of affection and 
obligation. Applicant is in close familial contact with her mother and one of her brothers. 
While she communicates less frequently with three of her siblings and her mother-in-
law, she nevertheless has long-standing familial obligations to them.  
 
 Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. proprietary information. The PRC maintains 
intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwan 
connections. Applicant travels to Taiwan frequently. She is attentive and loyal to her 
family members in Taiwan. If Applicant were to continue her travel to Taiwan as a 
federal contractor with a security clearance, this could raise additional conflict of interest 
concerns that might also threaten U.S. security interests. Applicant failed to meet her 
burden of providing information to rebut or mitigate the security concerns raised by AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). I therefore conclude that the mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 
8(b), and 8(c) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested she was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and well-
educated professional. She has close familial ties with six family members who are 
residents and citizens of Taiwan. She is in frequent contact with her family members 
and travels to Taiwan often to visit her family members. She has not renounced her dual 
citizenship with Taiwan, and she has expressed a wish to retire and live in Taiwan. As a 
U.S. citizen, she acquired a Taiwanese passport in 2008, and she carried it, along with 
her U.S. passport, when she traveled to Taiwan in 2008. Taiwan actively seeks to 
collect proprietary information from U.S. businesses and government contractors. 
Because of her close relationships with Taiwanese citizens, Applicant could be 
vulnerable to foreign exploitation, inducement, pressure, or coercion.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the   
foreign influence and foreign preference adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:           AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:            Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:            AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.e.:           Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
12 
 
 
                                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
