 
 
1 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-03886 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concern related to personal conduct. Accordingly, 
his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant signed his notarized response to the SOR (Answer) on September 9, 
2011. He admitted the single allegation under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 13, 2011, and the case was 
assigned to me on October 24, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 
15, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 30 2011. The 
Government offered three exhibits, which I admitted into evidence as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, 
and offered eight exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through H. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 6, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admission in response to the SOR is incorporated as a finding of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old, married, and has one 25-year-old son. (GE 1) He holds 
an associate’s degree. He served in the Navy from 1986 until his honorable discharge in 
1995. Applicant held a security clearance without incident while he served in the Navy, 
and since then in his positions working for federal defense contractors. He currently 
works as an engineering technician, investigating and correcting electromagnetic 
interference with military aircraft. (GE 1; Tr. 39) 
 
In a previous position, where Applicant worked from 2001 to 2008, he was 
assigned to work on three contracts. His primary supervisor was not pleased about being 
required to share Applicant's work time, and demanded he work most of his hours for the 
supervisor. In late 2008, Applicant's primary supervisor called Applicant at his work 
location on three occasions, and Applicant was not there. The supervisor concluded that 
Applicant had left work. When Applicant charged hours to the contract for the instances 
when the supervisor believed he was not there, the supervisor accused him of time card 
fraud. (GE 2; Tr. 39-46) 
 
Applicant contends that he worked on the supervisor’s contract until it was time to 
report to another duty station to work on one of his other assigned contracts. Applicant 
had witnesses at the time who could testify that he was working on the appropriate 
contracts at the times when the supervisor claimed he was not at work. Applicant 
provided the names and contact information for those witnesses in his response to 
DOHA interrogatories. One of the witnesses who could verify Applicant's account was 
the company facility security officer (FSO). Applicant was not informed about his 
supervisor’s charges, or counseled by Human Resources (HR). Despite having 
previously received outstanding evaluations and raises based on his performance, he 
was terminated in December 2008 for time card fraud. Applicant contacted an attorney to 
discuss pursuing a wrongful termination suit, but was told it was not advisable because 
he worked in an “at-will” employment state. (GE 2; Tr. 46-50) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in October 2009 to update 
his security clearance. Question 13c asked whether he had been fired from a job in the 
previous seven years. Applicant believed the term “fired” did not accurately portray what 
had occurred because he was wrongfully terminated based on false allegations, and he 
responded that he had been laid off. He testified that he now realizes he should have 
used the explanatory area on the application to describe the circumstances of the event. 
(GE 1; Tr. 31-33, 37) 
 
 When Applicant met with a security investigator in February 2010, he did not tell 
her that he was terminated. After the interview, he realized he had made a “terrible 
mistake.” He tried several times to reach her by telephone to set up an interview, and 
left her voicemail messages. He also sent her an email, but she did not respond. 
Applicant discussed his failure to disclose with his current supervisor, who contacted the 
company FSO. Both of them thought it was acceptable to wait to explain the problem 
until Applicant was contacted for a second interview. He did not hear from the agent for 
some time. When she called, he told her he had been trying to reach her to set up 
another interview. She stated that she traveled frequently and did not always have 
access to her email and work phone. During his second interview, Applicant fully 
explained the circumstances of his termination, and told her that he had disclosed the 
events to his program manager, team leads, and coworkers. (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 55-60) 
  
 Applicant's current supervisor also sought the FSO’s advice about answering the 
security clearance application question regarding the termination. He told Applicant that 
the FSO advised Applicant not to address the event unless the information was 
specifically requested. The FSO provided a letter elaborating on his discussion with 
Applicant's supervisor. The FSO advised that each question must be read carefully and 
answered appropriately. The FSO and the supervisor discussed the difference between 
being fired and being laid off. Finally, the FSO noted that an applicant need not say he 
was fired if he was, in fact, laid off. At no time did either Applicant's supervisor or his 
FSO recommend that Applicant provide false information to the agent. Applicant's 
current program manager, current FSO, the FSO at his previous company, and several 
of the employees there, are all aware of these events. (GE 2, 3; AE B) 
 
 Applicant testified that he now realizes that he should have understood “the need 
to answer the questions carefully without my personal thoughts and emotions interfering 
with the simple facts.” He acted, in his own words, out of “ignorance and fear.” He was 
ignorant about the effect that disclosing a termination would have on his eligibility to 
continue his clearance. He thought he would immediately lose the clearance. He was 
supporting his unemployed son, and caring for his live-in mother-in-law, who suffers 
from advanced Alzheimer’s disease. He feared the devastating consequences his family 
would suffer if he lost his job. He knows that his ignorance “is no excuse for the poor 
decisions that I made during the investigating process.” He also stated, “I'm very sorry 
for the mistakes that I've made and take complete responsibility for my actions.” (AE A; 
Tr. 23, 27-28) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant noted in his interrogatory response that, “To have my moral character 
and work ethics destroyed by one person’s lies has been the hardest thing in my life to 
deal with so far.” (Tr. 56) Applicant testified that his actions in not being forthright about 
the termination demonstrated poor reasoning: 
 
I fully understand now that was some pretty bad reasoning and I should 
not have done that. And since being educated, I understand now that I 
would never do that again in the future. I would mark that I was fired, 
immediately disclose all the information surrounding that termination, so 
there would be no questions and no problems there. (GE 2) 
 
 Applicant's first witness, a co-worker and personal friend of many years, stated 
that Applicant’s military and professional experience are an invaluable asset to the Navy 
program they support. He is aware of Applicant's problems with his previous supervisor. 
Applicant has told him he regrets failing to explain the circumstances of his job 
termination. Applicant's team lead describes Applicant as hard-working and trustworthy, 
and notes that Applicant is “especially diligent in handling classified information and 
follows DoD policy.” He promptly informed her of his security clearance issue, showing 
an “open and honest attitude” and “great strength of character.” She noted his regret 
about not explaining the circumstances of his job termination on his application, and 
believes that he has learned a hard lesson from these events. (AE C, E; Tr. 62-69) 
 
 The deputy program manager for the Navy program Applicant supports stated in 
his letter that he has observed Applicant handling classified information in a 
professional manner and in line with all applicable policies. He is aware of Applicant's 
conduct, but describes him as an exceptional employee who has “contributed directly to 
the preservation [of] lives of military members.” A co-worker also described Applicant as 
displaying the highest level of integrity. Applicant's wife testified that, in their 25 years of 
marriage, Applicant never divulged information about the nature of his work. She also 
provided a letter describing Applicant's stress when he was accused of fraud and 
terminated. She notes that he does not take his errors lightly, has expressed remorse, 
and is striving to ensure that it will never happen in the future. (AE D, F, G; Tr. 73-85)  
 
 Applicant's program manager and immediate supervisor explained in his letter 
that Applicant has been open about his errors “with me, his company, other employees, 
and more particularly, with the government customers he supports…” His opinion is that 
Applicant did not intentionally deceive or lie about his employment situation, but felt 
strongly that he was wrongfully terminated from his last job. In his opinion, stating that 
he was ‘fired’ did not adequately explain the situation.” He believes that Applicant's 
openness about events and willingness to receive further training are “positive attitude 
adjustments.” (AE B) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.1
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline E. 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest2
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.3 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or 
her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution 
of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.4
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the personal conduct guideline is that  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
                                                          
1 Directive. 6.3. 
 
2 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
3 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
4 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15) 
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, AG ¶ 16, 
and in particular the following: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 When Applicant completed his security clearance application, he indicated that 
he was laid off from his previous employment, rather than terminated. He stated at the 
hearing that he had no intent to deceive, but also admitted that he was not forthcoming 
because of fear. Applicant feared that admitting a termination would place his security 
clearance in jeopardy, and threaten his livelihood and his family’s well-being. I find that 
he consciously decided not to disclose the termination. His failure to disclose was 
deliberate, and AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant’s offense was infrequent. The record contains no evidence of failure to 
disclose facts in any previous investigation during 25 years of holding a security 
clearance. Numerous letters of recommendation attest to Applicant's character. This 
event, which occurred three years ago, does not cast doubt on his current 
trustworthiness or reliability. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
 
Applicant was open and honest about the fact that he did not reveal his 
termination. He disclosed it to his wife, his coworkers, his team lead, his supervisor, and 
the FSOs in both companies. Following his first interview, he tried to reach the security 
investigator to disclose that he had not been forthcoming. He is now acutely aware of 
the gravity of his actions. Given his sincere remorse for his actions, and no evidence of 
 
 
7 
 
 
similar behavior since that time, I conclude that such behavior is unlikely to recur. AG 
17(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the following whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant failed to be forthright in answering a question on his security clearance 
application. He let his indignation about the unjust termination determine his response. 
He also worried about his family’s welfare and believed that he would immediately lose 
his clearance if he disclosed a termination. All these factors led him to make a serious 
error in judgment. However, I considered the three years that have passed with no 
evidence of similar conduct or poor judgment; Applicant's openness with his supervisor, 
FSO, co-workers, and wife; and his 25-year-history of holding a security clearance 
without incident. I had the opportunity to closely observe Applicant's demeanor and 
assess his credibility during the hearing. I am convinced that he is genuinely remorseful 
for his conduct and, given the serious consequences of his acts, will not engage in such 
conduct in the future.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concern. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised 
under the guideline for personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow 
Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
