Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-2, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-B.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-10457
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 16 June 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing. DOHA2
assigned the case to me 9 September 2011, and I convened a hearing 29 September
2011. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 9 October 2011.
 
The account holder must first decide how much mail to delegate. The options are “All Mail, Calendar, and To3
Do” or “Only Calendar and To Do.” Once the account holder makes that choice, the account holder must
decide how much access to give. There are different access options depending on the level of delegation
chosen. “Only Calendar and To Do” has only two access options: read only or read, create, edit and delete.
The “All Mail . . . “ option has five access options, ranging from read only to variations of read, edit, create,
delete documents or send email on behalf of the account holder.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.a. He is a 51-year-old
senior systems engineer employed by a Government contractor since November 2002.
He seeks reinstatement of the security clearance he has held largely without incident
since 1986, except for a time from October 1999 to November 2002 when he was
employed with a company that did not require him to hold a clearance (GE 1).
Applicant has been the subject of favorable background investigations in
December 1985, April 1991, December 1998, and January 2003. Consequently, he has
had both clearance and access as necessary until his clearances were suspended in
January 2007 and ultimately revoked in February 2008. As that clearance involved
special access, Applicant contested this action at a personal appearance in March
2009. The agency upheld its initial decision in August 2009 and Applicant did not appeal
that action to the final decision authority.
In 2006, Applicant was employed as a contractor onsite at another Government
agency (AGA). Applicant was a program manager for his company supervising a team
of company employees working on a Government contract supporting AGA. There was
another program manager for another company supervising a team of that company’s
employees working on another Government contract supporting AGA. Applicant and his
fellow program manager reported to an AGA program manager.
In late 2006, AGA program manager announced at a program meeting that he
was giving access to his Lotus Notes calendar to his secretary, Applicant, and his fellow
program manager to better coordinate their efforts on AGA programs. Lotus Notes is a
proprietary product of IBM Corporation. IBM heavily markets Lotus Notes for its
“Calendar Delegation” feature—among other features.
The calendar delegation feature (AE B) allowed AGA program manager to
delegate responsibility for his calendar and email to other groups or individuals. Only
the account holder can change the settings necessary to delegate the calendar. There
are a number of setting choices the account holder must make to enable the feature.3
The record contains no information about what options AGA program manager intended
to enable for his secretary, Applicant, and his fellow program manager. However, he
enabled “All Mail . . .” to Applicant and at least gave access to “Read any document.”
 Applicant discovered this fact in about October 2006, when he noticed he could
access AGA program manager’s email. Initially, he was disconcerted by this discovery,
3
but when he checked the access permissions and saw that both the secretary and his
fellow program manager had the same access permissions, he figured that AGA
program manager had intended him to have that access.
During the next few weeks, he read AGA program manager’s emails to adjust his
team’s work priorities to match the concerns reflected in the email traffic. He saw
nothing untoward in the access he had been given and did not discuss his access with
AGA program manager, his subordinates, or his fellow program manager. His fellow
program manager never mentioned to him that she had access to AGA program
manager’s emails.
Applicant used his access to AGA program manager’s emails only for purposes
of managing his program with AGA with two exceptions: He once looked at an “eyes
only” email thinking that it might have something to do with his program. It did not, and
he never opened another “eyes only” email. Once, his curiousness got the better of him
and he looked at AGA program manager’s leave and earnings statement (LES) to see
how much he made.
One day in December 2006, Applicant noticed that AGA program manager’s
email account was generating a “read receipt” for those messages that Applicant had
read—something that the program had not done before. That made Applicant think, for
the first time, that maybe AGA program manager had not meant to give Applicant
access to the emails. When he could not delete the “read receipts,” probably because
AGA program manager had only granted “read only” access, he went to AGA program
manager and reported that he had been given access to AGA program manager’s
email. AGA program manager gave him a noncommital response.
The next day, Applicant was removed from his program manager position, and
his clearances and access were suspended. He was polygraphed twice in June and
July 2007 and his clearances and access were revoked by AGA in February 2008
because of the email incident as well as two other incidents characterized as security
violations alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b. Both those incidents had previously been
addressed in earlier background investigations and polygraphs and found to have no
security significance.
In July 1997 (SOR 1.a), Applicant was working at a different AGA. Part of his job
was taking classified AGA documents and portion marking them, i.e. marking each
paragraph of the document with its proper classification in accordance with recently-
implemented classification rules. The documents had originally been classified under
older rules which classified the entire document at the highest level of any one
paragraph without portion marking. Applicant had never worked on this kind of project
before and it was the first time he had ever worked in a Government facility as a
contractor. He got his instructions from AGA program manager and did his best to apply
those instructions as he declassified/reclassified the documents. The program security
office eventually double-checked his work (Tr. 46). Nevertheless, he later had personal
qualms about whether he had performed the work properly, which apparently surfaced
4
or resurfaced during the 2007 polygraphs. However, his Government supervisor at
AGA at the time had no such reservations. He recalled “[Applicant’s] fastidiousness in
document handling and our intense effort in generating project classification guidelines.”
(GE 2) He reiterated the quality of Applicant’s performance during that project (Tr. 25)
as well as two other occasions when he and Applicant worked together on projects in
2003 and 2005.
In 2003-2004, Applicant was the Information Systems Security Officer (ISSO) for
a program office at yet a third AGA. A routine part of his job was to travel off-site to
perform system audits of the information systems at other Government contractors
performing contract work for AGA, to ensure the systems were properly configured. The
audits were performed using unclassified standards published by the Defense
Information Security Agency (DISA) on the agency website.
Applicant worked in a special compartmented information facility (SCIF) at AGA.
The SCIF contained an unclassified computer which was not connected to the classified
computers in the SCIF. Applicant used the unclassified computer to download the
unclassified DISA specifications onto unclassified discs that Applicant then took with
him to the site audits. AGA security officer provided the discs Applicant used for the
audits.
The security requirements for transporting the discs varied with the audit
destination. If Applicant was taking the disc from his SCIF to another SCIF, he need
only comply with the normal courier rules for transporting classified material. However, if
he was taking the disc to a facility without a SCIF, he needed a specific authorization
signed by AGA security officer to remove the disc from the SCIF. If the audit revealed
that the facility had many issues to address to bring its information systems into
compliance, Applicant would sometimes leave the disc at the facility.
Applicant believes that he followed the rules for getting the discs cleared for
removal from the SCIF. He never had an issue with it at the job site. However, in later
polygraphs, he could not always recall whether he always obtained the necessary
authorization.
Applicant’s many work and character references consider him honest and
trustworthy (GE 2). Most appear to be aware of the email incident that was the
immediate precipitant of Applicant losing his clearances and access. Applicant has
apparently handled classified information without incident, except for a minor security
violation in 1999, for which he received a reprimand in March 2004 during a review of
his security file.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶ 16.(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse5
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information;
5
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E. The
Government’s characterizations in SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d that Applicant admits are
enough to raise security concerns.  However, I am not bound by those characterizations5
in making a decision, and I conclude that those characterizations are not reasonable
based on a reading of the entire record.
The facts alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b arguably constitute security violations, yet
this case was not alleged as a security violation case under Guideline K. A reasonable
reading of the facts surrounding both allegations reveals that Applicant did the job he
was tasked by his AGA to do, did it with direct instructions of, and oversight by, the
Government, and did it to the best of his ability. The Government found no real-time
fault with his handling of protected information, and his handling of protected information
passed evaluation in earlier polygraphs. Security rules do not require perfection in
handling protected information, and the fact that Applicant later questioned himself
about his handling of protected information, notwithstanding the fact that he was acting
under Government direction, bespeaks at least as great, if not greater, commitment to
Similarly, we do not know if that mistake was AGA program manager’s own violation of agency security rules.6
6
protecting classified information than an Applicant who blithely assumes that his
conduct is unimpeachable simply because he was following the Government’s
instructions, or thought he was.
Regarding the allegations in SOR 1.c, I specifically give little weight to the facts
or characterizations of AGA in revoking Applicant’s clearances and access. While AGA
is free to make its own conclusions, the fact remains that the agency decisional
document is an advocacy document based, not on any irrefutable recording of
Applicant’s statements (i.e. sworn statement) but on a polygrapher’s (if not others)
distillation of what Applicant said, colored by his perception of what the polygraph charts
meant. Put another way, not every twitch under a polygrapher’s gaze reveals nefarious
intent. But a polygrapher has no incentive to conclude benign intent, and a decisional
document concluding nefarious intent requires no marshaling of facts consistent with
benign intent.
We will never know what AGA program manager intended to enable when he
told the staff meeting that he was giving access to his calendar to his secretary,
Applicant, and Applicant’s fellow program manager, because his statements do not
appear in the record. We do not know why he did not act on Applicant’s behalf over
what was, at worst, his careless mistake in granting email access.  Similarly, we do not6
know what the fellow program manager knew about her access to AGA program
manager’s emails or what actions she took if/when she discovered that access. We do
not know what action, if any, AGA took against the other program manager. We do
know that only AGA program manager could authorize access, and given the steps
necessary to grant access, whatever he intended, his granting email access to
Applicant and his fellow program manager could not have been inadvertent. Based on
the group that had been given access, Applicant was perfectly reasonable in assuming
that he had been given access deliberately and he largely used that access consistent
with the presumed intent for giving such access: to facilitate program management
responsibilities for AGA program manager and his two subordinate program
managers—the very functions touted by IBM for its Lotus Notes. The fact that Applicant
tried to delete the “read receipts” when he suddenly realized that his access must have
been a mistake, does little to change this analysis. It is all too easy to sharp-shoot
Applicant’s actions with 20-20 hindsight, and I will not do so here.
Finally, none of Applicant’s conduct occurred more recently than five years ago.
Aside from his concededly poor judgment in reading the “eyes only” email and looking
at AGA program manager’s LES, and his one security violation in 1999, Applicant has a
decades-long track record of properly handling protected information. The allegations in
SOR 1.a and 1.b ultimately raise no security concerns, and whatever security concerns
are raised by the allegations in SOR 1.c are mitigated by the passage of time and
Applicant’s overall record of properly handling protected information. The allegations of
SOR 1.d raise no independent security concerns for me to resolve. I resolve Guideline
E for Applicant.
7
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-d: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
