1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-10419
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
The SOR was not dated. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written
case on November 7, 2011. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material
(FORM) on November 18, 2011, and was provided an opportunity to file objections and
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  Applicant did
not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2011. Based on a
review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He received a
certificate from a technical school in 2003. He is married and has two children.
Applicant has worked for his current employer since January 2004. This is his first
application for a security clearance. 
Financial Considerations
Applicant admits to 27 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR in an amount of
approximately $37,000. (Item 4) The collection accounts include a 2005 vehicle
repossession, student loans, and a 2009 vehicle repossession. He has not provided
any information concerning payments on any of the delinquent debts. 
Applicant states that his financial problems began when he was in school in late
2002 until 2003. However, the majority of Applicant’s debts do not arise out of the 2002-
2003 period. The car purchased in 2004 for $16,000 was repossessed in April 2005. In
July 2006, Applicant and his wife signed for a gym membership. Within six months, the
account was delinquent. In December 2007 or 2008, Applicant’s wages were garnished
in the amount of $100 per week for failure to pay his student loans.  In 2008, Applicant
purchased another vehicle, which was repossessed in March 2009. (Item 8)
Applicant has been steadily employed in his current position since January 2004.
He did not present any information that he was unemployed other than not having
steady hours when he was in technical school. (Item 6). In September 2011, Applicant’s
budget showed a negative monthly remainder of $450. His budget does not include any
payments toward his student loans, which came out of forbearance in April 2011. He
notes his net monthly income is $3,648. His spouse does not work outside their home.
(Item 6)
Applicant acknowledged and disclosed his debts to the Government. During his
July 2010, interview with investigators, he stated he intends to pay his debts. He has
not furnished any receipts for any payments or any structured plan to repay the SOR
debts.
Criminal Conduct
Applicant has three criminal arrests three and convictions from 2005 until 2007.
(Item 5) He admits that he committed the acts. (Item 4) He is currently on probation for
a felony conviction until May 2012. He is also required to register as a sex offender until
the year 2022.  
3
Applicant’s explanation for his 2005 arrest and charge for solicitation of a minor
for sexual assault, 3  degree felony, for which he pled guilty in May 2007, is hisrd
engagement in chat rooms. He was 21 and he believed the female was 18 or 19. He
was unmarried. He wanted to “hang out with her.” (Item 6) He met her at a pool and
was arrested for the above charge. He did not know that he had been corresponding
with an undercover police officer. Applicant was sentenced to five years of community
supervision (completion date May 2012). He was fined $2,500 and ordered to register
as a sex offender. He was required to complete 160 hours of community service and
participate in a sex offender treatment program.
In May 2007, one week after he was placed on probation for the felony offense,
discussed above, Applicant was arrested and charged with theft after he and his wife
attempted to steal groceries. He pled guilty to the charge and was placed on one year
probation. (Item 6) 
In August 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with an invalid
license. He pled guilty to the offense and was ordered to serve three days in
confinement and pay court costs. The invalid license was due to Applicant not renewing
his license and having the required “sex offender” noted on the driver’s license within 30
days of sentencing. Applicant claims this was an error on the part of the Department of
Motor Vehicles. There is no court documentation in the record to substantiate this
claim.
Personal Conduct
Applicant admitted the information that was raised under  Criminal Conduct. The
SOR bases the Personal Conduct on the three allegations to which Applicant admitted.
His lack of financial responsibility in dealing with his delinquent debts since 2003, and
his criminal conduct cast doubt on his judgment and reliability. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
6
Applicant admits to delinquent debts in the amount of approximately $37,000.
The debts are confirmed in his credit reports. They span from 2003 until the present
time. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a)
and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant has good intentions to pay his delinquent debts. However, he has not
provided any information to show that he has paid the delinquent debts or has a plan to
repay the debts. He has not reported financial counseling. He has been gainfully
employed since 2004, and has not raised any circumstances beyond his control that
would contribute to his financial problems.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
7
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.
Applicant’s admissions and the evidence of arrests and convictions from 2005
until 2007 are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). Applicant is currently on probation
until May 2012. AG ¶ 31(d) is also applicable.
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
After reviewing the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them fully apply in
this case. Applicant’s behavior occurred between 2005 and 2007. He acknowledged
that the last incident was in 2007. Although four years have elapsed, Applicant has not
provided information establishing that he is rehabilitated. He is still on probation. There
is no information in the record concerning completion of his community service. I find
that he has not mitigated the security concern under criminal conduct.  
 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
8
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
9
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
Applicant’s behavior concerning his financial responsibility and his criminal
conduct shows lack of judgment, reliability and trustworthiness over a period of years.
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e). His conduct shows a pattern of poor judgment. He did disclose his
financial problems and his criminal conduct on his security clearance application to his
credit. However, absent any significant evidence of mitigation, he has not met his
burden. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
10
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant admitted his financial delinquencies and his criminal conduct on his
security clearance application. He has not presented any other information to persuade
me that he has mitigated personal conduct concerns.  I have doubts about his judgment
and reliability. After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal conduct. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct beginning in 2005 through 2007 which
includes arrests, convictions, guilty pleas, and probation. Granted, the last offense was
in 2007. However, he is still on probation. The choices he made over the years indicate
lack of trustworthiness. 
Applicant has not provided any information to show that he is a changed person
or that he has taken action to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. At this point, I have
doubts about his judgment and reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the
Government. Applicant has not met his burden in this case. He has not mitigated the
11
security concerns under financial consideration, criminal conduct, and personal
conduct. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
