KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR.  Accordingly, these allegations were
not controverted.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern were supported by
substantial record evidence.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.    
CASE NO: 10-10045.a1
DATE: 01/12/2012
DATE: January 17, 2012
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-10045
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 3, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 28, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Mark Harvey
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors; whether the Government had met its burden of production; whether the Judge
failed to consider record evidence; whether the Judge failed properly to weigh the record evidence;
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm the decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an employee of a
Defense contractor, seeking reinstatement of her security clearance.  She holds bachelor’s and
master’s degrees in business administration.  
In 2007, Applicant and her husband purchased investment properties in State A and State
B.  The couple are experienced real estate investors who have owned 14 properties since 1984.  They
purchased the house in State A for $359,000.  They made a $16,000 down payment and financed the
purchased with a $280,000 first mortgage and the balance with a home equity line of credit.
Eventually, they stopped making payments because Applicant’s husband’s pay was reduced by 10%
and he was furloughed from his job for ten days.  They hoped to get the bank’s attention in an effort
to secure a loan modification.  Applicant requested that the lender accept a deed in lieu of
foreclosure.  Although Applicant believes that this was approved, the transaction was never
accomplished.  Ultimately the property was subject to a foreclosure sale.  Applicant Exhibit P, IRS
Form 1099-A, states that the outstanding balance on the property was $286,989.  Applicant provided
no documentation to show that she was not liable for the balance.
Applicant and her husband purchased a house under construction in State B for $193,000.
They made a down payment of $10,000 and financed the rest with an interest-only loan.  They
planned to flip the property as soon as construction was finished.  They rented the property for
several months, but eventually they missed several mortgage payments.  They attempted to enter
into a forbearance agreement and loan modification.  At the end of the negotiation the lender made
an offer which included additional charges, with a new loan balance of $235,000.  Applicant
declined the offer.  She attempted a short sale at $150,000 but received an offer of $135,000.  The
lender advised that, if Applicant would provide $15,000, the lender would absorb the balance of the
loss, approximately $85,000.  Applicant had $30,00 in savings.  She counter-offered $6,000, but the
lender held firm at $15,000.  She did not accept the offer, and the lender foreclosed.  She provided
no documentation to show that she was not liable for any shortfall or delinquency resulting form the
foreclosure sale. 
 
Applicant and her husband own a residence in a State C, with equity at about $200,000.
They have $328,000 in stocks and bonds and a mutual fund account of $256,882.  They have two
IRAs, worth $76,251 and $63,432 respectively.  They also own a valuable pieces of property in State
D.  Applicant’s current annual pay is about $112,000 and her husband’s is $131,000.  She and her
husband both put 12% of their salaries into 401(k) plans.  Their efforts to address the financial issues
arising from their properties in State A and State B did not include significant use of their income
or other assets.
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of her work performance and for her
honesty, loyalty, responsibility, and trustworthiness.  She has received outstanding performance
evaluations.
In his analysis of Applicant’s case, the Judge noted that the debts alleged in the SOR totaled
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c):
“a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”  
about $577,000.  They had been delinquent for over a year.  He concluded that these debts raised
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FCDC) a and  c.1  In evaluating Applicant’s case
for mitigation, he noted evidence favorable to her, such as her education, her admission of
responsibility for the debts in her clearance application and subsequent interview; and the economic
circumstances which affected the value of her properties.  However, he also noted that Applicant’s
financial condition has been fairly stable since 2009 and that she declined to follow through on an
opportunity to resolve one of the debts through a short sale.  Rather, the Judge stated that she
abandoned the properties, resulting in foreclosure, and she did not provide persuasive evidence that
she is not liable for any deficiencies.  He concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated responsible
action in regard to her debts.  He stated that she and her husband could have taken steps to increase
the funds available for debt resolution, but had not done so by the close of the record.
Applicant contends that the evidence does not support the Guideline F concerns which the
Judge found to have been raised.  In a DOHA hearing, the Government’s burden is to present
substantial evidence regarding any controverted allegation.  Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 08-06859 at 4
(App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2010).  Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR.  Therefore, they were not
controverted.  Nevertheless, the Government presented evidence consisting of the clearance
application, Applicant’s answers to interrogatories, a voluminous submission of documents by
Applicant, and three credit reports.  Altogether they constitute substantial evidence of the delinquent
debts alleged in the SOR.  Given the amounts of the debts, the length of time during which they have
been delinquent, and the circumstances surrounding them, the Judge’s decision that the case raises
Guideline F security concerns is sustainable.
Applicant contends that the Judge’s findings contain errors, principally his finding that she
and her husband had enough funds to pay off their debts.  However, the Judge’s statements to the
effect that Applicant and her husband have the financial means to resolve their debts is sustainable
on this record.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based on substantial record
evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05399 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2011.  Considering the record
evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings are sustainable.    
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the record evidence or that he did
not properly weigh the evidence.  She argues that he did not take into account the depth and severity
of her financial situation, including the economic crisis and the extent of her available funds.
However, a Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 10-07080 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2011).  In this case, Applicant has not rebutted the
presumption, nor has she demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  
  The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
