 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 11-05267 
                                                            )                   
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record, I conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or 
mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference. 
His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on November 12, 2010. On July 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 18, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
 
2 
 
 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 6, 2011. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. On September 7, 2011, the Government 
mailed the FORM to Applicant with instructions to submit any additional information or 
objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on September 16, 
2011. His response was due on October 16, 2011. He did not submit any information or 
raise any objections within the required time period. On November 29, 2011, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation that raises a security concern under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶ 1.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
Guideline C allegation. His admission is admitted as a finding of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 69 years old, never married, and has been employed as a merchant 
seaman since 1969. In his current position with a government contractor, he works as a 
deck officer and has applied for a security clearance. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1964 to 1966. He was honorably 
discharged at the end of his military service. In 2000, he earned an associate’s degree. 
Applicant thinks he may have been awarded a security clearance during his military 
service. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant, a U.S. citizen, is one of six children born in the United States to U.S. 
citizens of Irish descent. Two of Applicant’s siblings, a brother (now deceased) and his 
only sister acquired dual citizenship with Ireland. (Item 5.) 
 
 Between 2001 and 2005, Applicant contemplated also applying for dual 
citizenship with Ireland. He was eligible for Irish citizenship as the grandchild of an Irish 
citizen. In January 2005, Applicant acquired Irish citizenship, and in December 2005, he 
acquired an Irish passport, valid until December 2015.1
 
 Applicant stated that he 
acquired Irish citizenship to increase his connection with the land of his ancestors. (Item 
5; Item 6.) 
 Applicant listed his dual citizenship with Ireland on his e-QIP. DOHA sent 
Applicant an interrogatory requesting that he provide evidence that he had “destroyed, 
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated your Ireland 
passport,” and referenced DoD Directive 5220.6, Enclosure 2, Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference. On June 15, as a part of his response to the interrogatory, Applicant 
provided a photocopy of all the pages in his Irish passport, which showed that he had 
not used the document for travel. (Item 6.) 
 
                                            
1 The record does not specify but the facts support a conclusion that Applicant and his siblings acquired 
dual citizenship with the Republic of Ireland. 
 
3 
 
 
 Additionally, as a part of the interrogatory, DOHA sent Applicant the following 
information: 
 
Destruction of your foreign passport must be witnessed by the Facility 
Security Officer (FSO) of your employer and a destruction record must be 
notarized by the FSO and submitted to DOHA with your response to this 
interrogatory. 
 
If you surrender your foreign passport to your Facility Security Officer, an 
acceptance document must be notarized by the FSO and forwarded to 
DOHA with your response to this interrogatory. The acceptance document 
must state that your employer accepts responsibility for the foreign 
passport and that your employer’s records will be annotated with a 
requirement to notify DOHA immediately if the foreign passport is ever 
returned to you. Please remember that any security clearance issued to 
you by the Department of Defense may be adversely affected if the 
passport is returned to you. 
 
(Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 DOHA then asked Applicant to describe actions that he had taken regarding his 
Irish passport. Applicant responded, “Nothing.” Applicant’s response to the interrogatory 
was dated June 15, 2011. (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, dated August 18, 2011, Applicant affirmed his 
allegiance to the United States and stated that he had not destroyed his Irish passport. 
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM. There is no evidence that he has 
surrendered or destroyed his Irish passport. (Item 4.)  
    
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
 
5 
 
 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, claims dual citizenship with Ireland and 
possesses a valid Irish passport which will not expire until December 2015. Applicant’s 
conduct raises a potentially disqualifying security concern under AG ¶10(a)(1).  
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
 
6 
 
 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign 
passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport 
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated.” 
 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, born to parents who were also native-born 
U.S. citizens, actively sought Irish citizenship and an Irish passport as a mature adult of 
approximately 63 years. He has not indicated that he intends to renounce his Irish 
citizenship, which he acquired in order to feel closer to the land of his ancestors. There 
is no evidence in the record that Applicant’s use of his Irish passport was “approved by 
the cognizant security authority.” Moreover, Applicant failed to present credible 
evidence that his Irish passport has “been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” Accordingly, I conclude that none of the 
Guideline C mitigating conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who is 
proud of his Irish heritage. In order to feel closer to the land of his ancestors, Applicant 
acquired Irish citizenship and an Irish passport, which will not expire until December 
2015. He has elected to retain his Irish passport. Applicant’s active preference for his 
Irish citizenship raises security concerns that are not mitigated by the record in this 
case.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:              Against Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                    
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
