 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-02291 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Price, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 12, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On June 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 20, 2011. He answered the 
SOR in writing through counsel on June 28, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 1, 2011. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on August 19, 2011, and I received the case assignment on 
August 29, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 27, 2011, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on November 15, 2011. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits 1 to 3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified, called one 
additional witness, and submitted Exhibits A through S, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 29, 2011. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c of the SOR, with explanations. He admitted the factual allegation in ¶¶ 1.b of the 
SOR that he was contacted by a federal investigator, but denied he admitted to the 
investigator that he told a former girlfriend he was a government employee. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He was married in October 2011. His wife testified for 
him. Applicant went to college from August 2001 to December 2005. Applicant 
graduated from college with a degree in aeronautics and a pilot’s license. Being a pilot 
is Applicant’s career goal. Now he is employed as a pilot for a defense contractor. (Tr. 
33, 48, 53, 55, 83; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant’s wife met him while she was in college in September 2002. They 
remained in contact from that time until January 2006 when their frequency of contact 
increased. His wife is a teacher. She regards her husband as a man of integrity and 
honesty. (Tr. 22-30, 35; Exhibit R) 
 
 Applicant had a girlfriend from his senior year in high school until April 2005. 
There is four years difference in their ages. The relationship started in high school when 
Applicant was a senior in 2000 to 2001 and the former girlfriend was a freshman. She 
finished high school while Applicant attended college in another state several hundred 
miles away. Their romantic relationship ended in April 2005 when he broke up with her. 
They communicated for the last time on July 14, 2005, concerning the return of personal 
items they had given each other during their relationship. After the termination of their 
relationship, the former girlfriend alleged Applicant made telephone calls and sent text 
messages to her on July 29, 2005, stating he was a Central Intelligence Agency 
employee and if they did not resume their relationship their lives would be in danger. 
Applicant’s former girlfriend and her parents contacted the state police about the alleged 
telephone calls. There was also a blocked telephone call to the former girlfriend on July 
31, 2005, but the caller was never identified because the Federal Bureau of 
Investigations (FBI) did not get a subpoena for the telephone company records in 2005. 
The company would not release any records without a subpoena. (Tr. 61, 62, 82, 98, 
99, 100; Exhibits 2, 3, A, B, C, D) 
 
On July 29, 2005, an FBI agent contacted Applicant about the messages. 
Applicant remembers receiving the telephone call but denies admitting to the FBI agent 
that he made any such statements in any way to his former girlfriend. The FBI’s report 
 
3 
 
 
of August 3, 2005, states Applicant admitted he told his former girlfriend he was a CIA 
agent and that if they were not together someone could get killed or hurt. Applicant, 
according to the FBI, also acknowledged he realized the seriousness of the situation 
and he was merely bragging to impress his girlfriend. Applicant received the agent’s 
telephone call while he was on the flight ramp doing a pre-flight check on the airplane 
he was to use on a flight from one city to another in a single-engine plane. The flight 
was to depart at 5:14 p.m. and last for two hours. Applicant was busy with that 
procedure when the FBI agent called. (Tr. 36, 65-80; Exhibits 2, 3) 
 
Applicant denied telephoning and sending text messages to his former girlfriend 
claiming to be an agent of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and that both their lives 
could be in danger if she did not resume their relationship. Applicant’s telephone 
records for the dates of July 3, 2005 to August 2, 2005; do not show any telephone call 
to his former girlfriend. His flight log shows the flight on July 29, 2005, in the evening. 
Nor does it show a telephone call from the local FBI office. (Tr. 61-107; Exhibits 2, 3, A 
to D)  
 
Applicant then was contacted on December 15, 2010, by a government 
investigator as part of the background research for his security clearance. Applicant 
denied he posed as a CIA agent and denied he admitted to the FBI agent in 2005 that 
he posed as a CIA agent. Applicant submitted two pages of corrections to the 
December 15, 2010, background investigation. Applicant conceded he might have told 
the FBI agent in July 2005 that he knew such a situation would be serious, but does not 
recall stating he was trying to impress his former girlfriend. Applicant never had any 
criminal action taken against him for the July 2005 allegations. He was never contacted 
again about them until the December 15, 2010, interview with the government 
investigator. (Tr. 61, 62, 65, 74-80, 90-94; Exhibit 3)  
 
 Applicant had several background investigations done from August 2001 to the 
present. His various employers did checks and three states did investigations for 
concealed weapons permits. No unfavorable information resulted from those reviews. 
(Tr. 63; Exhibit 3, page 5) 
   
 Applicant submitted 10 character letters. His high school mathematics instructor’s 
2001 letter lists Applicant’s academic record and extracurricular activities in high school. 
A fellow pilot describes Applicant as honest and straight forward, trustworthy and hard 
working, a person who is very reliable and dependable. A coworker described Applicant 
as having very good personal interaction skills with customers at an airport where they 
worked long hours because of staff shortages. This person describes Applicant as being 
supportive of his former girlfriend when her parents divorced in 2005. Another character 
reference describes how he and Applicant renovated the writer’s rental properties and 
Applicant manages them competently and without direct oversight. This writer trusts the 
Applicant totally. A friend of Applicant’s of 20-years duration has known him since fifth 
grade in school. He trusts Applicant totally and considers him very friendly. Applicant’s 
mother wrote a letter on his behalf, describing his personal development since birth.     
(Exhibits E, G, I, M, N, O, P Q, R, S) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant testified credibly and directly addressed his answers to the specific 
allegations. His statements showed that at the time he was alleged to have telephoned 
and sent text messages to his former girlfriend about his being in the CIA he was 
enrolled in college. Having dated Applicant for four years, his former girlfriend knew he 
was attending college and could not be employed by the CIA at the same time. 
Applicant also showed that the FBI telephone call in July 2005 was answered when he 
was performing a pre-flight check list on an airport ramp, a busy and critical time for any 
pilot about to fly an airplane. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. (AG ¶ 2 (a)) The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions might apply: 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
 
6 
 
 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
 If Applicant denied to the government investigator in December 2010 that he had 
admitted to the FBI agent in July 2005 that he posed as a CIA agent in telephone calls 
to his former girlfriend with whom he broke off their relationship in April 2005, and told 
her either of them could be hurt if they did not resume the romantic situation they had, 
then AG ¶ 16 (b) would apply. Also, if the 2005 conduct occurred as alleged, then it 
would be personal conduct that creates vulnerability in Applicant to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, because he would have impersonated a federal agent. AG ¶ 16 
(e) would then apply.  
 
 However, Applicant convincingly denies such messages ever occurred or that he 
admitted they occurred to an FBI agent while Applicant was performing a pre-flight 
safety check on July 29, 2005. Applicant’s character statements and his wife’s 
testimony show a person of character who would not endanger his flight career trying to 
impress a former girlfriend with such silly statements. Applicant was in college at the 
time the statements were made. His former girlfriend knew he was in college at the 
time. Therefore, logically he could not be an employee of the CIA. It is more likely the 
former girlfriend was using the state police and FBI for her own purposes against 
Applicant, especially if her parents were in the midst of a divorce at the same time, as 
one of Applicant’s character letters states.  
 
 These alleged statements and incidents occurred six years ago. No disciplinary 
or criminal action was ever taken against Applicant. The passage of so much time, 
coupled with the lack of any repeated actions of a similar nature, also support the 
conclusion the allegations are false or exaggerated by a former romantic partner.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. While I 
conclude the incidents did not occur as alleged, if they had, then in the alternative, two 
mitigating conditions would certainly apply strongly: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 (f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
  As I stated earlier, the alleged conduct occurred six years ago without any 
repetition. They were also very unique if they ever occurred. They were also minor 
because no action was ever taken by anyone against Applicant. After August 1, 2005, 
nothing more was heard from Applicant’s former girlfriend. The allegations were 
unsubstantiated by any written proof, contradicted strongly by Applicant’s phone and 
 
7 
 
 
flight records, and the former girlfriend’s accusations were of questionable reliability 
because the relationship she had with Applicant was ended by him and not by mutual 
agreement or by her.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant presented himself in a 
very professional manner. He answered questions directly and honestly about a six-
year old incident that was illogical in its elements, at best. Applicant was never bothered 
about the allegations until he applied for a security clearance. They came from an 
unreliable source that used state and federal law enforcement agencies for whatever 
purpose she pursued in 2005 against a former boyfriend. The picture of Applicant 
presented by his testimony and the statements of his character witnesses is contrary to 
the allegation of pretending to be a CIA agent while in college in an attempt to get back 
a girlfriend he removed from his life three months earlier.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his alleged Personal 
Conduct, if it occurred, which I do not believe. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for 
Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
