 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00017 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jeremiah Sullivan, Esquire 
  
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s sporadic marijuana use between about 1986 and July 2010 showed 
poor judgment and raised security concerns. Drug involvement concerns are not 
mitigated; however, personal conduct concerns relating to a misdemeanor-level arrest 
in the early 1990s are mitigated. More time is needed without drug abuse to fully 
alleviate security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(GE 1) The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) subsequently issued an 
undated statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and 
E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be continued or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On June 9, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On July 22, 2011, 
Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
November 1, 2011, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On November 18, 2011, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for December 8, 2011. (HE 1) 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video teleconference. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered three exhibits (GE 1-3) (Tr. 21-22), and Applicant offered 
nine exhibits. (Tr. 16-20, 23; AE A-J) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-3 
and AE A-J. (Tr. 22-24) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On December 16, 2011, I received the transcript.  
 
Motion to Amend the SOR 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant “used prescription drugs for approximately 20 
years recreationally.” At the hearing, Applicant disclosed that he used Ritalin once or 
twice about 20 years ago. Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to state that 
Applicant “used prescription drugs approximately 20 years ago recreationally one or two 
times.” (Tr. 65) There was no objection, and I granted Department Counsel’s motion. 
(Tr. 66) 
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the following SOR allegations: (1) he “used 
marijuana recreationally from about 1986 to July 2010” (SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) he “smoked 
marijuana on and off for approximately 20 years” (SOR ¶ 1.b); (3) he received a ticket 
for marijuana possession (1.3 grams) in 1989 (SOR ¶ 1.c); he used Ritalin one or two 
times about 20 years ago (SOR ¶ 1.d—as amended); and in 1992 or 1993, the police 
arrested him for an expired car registration, not attending an adult drug diversion class, 
public nudity, and a parking violation (SOR ¶ 2.a). He denied that he continued to 
associate with drug users. (SOR ¶ 1.e) In his SOR response, he also provided some 
explanation and extenuating facts. He disagreed that his conduct raised reliability or 
trustworthiness concerns. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 5, 23) He 
performs highly specialized research for a military service. (Tr. 29, 48) He has worked 
for a contractor for five years, and recently the contractor decided Applicant should have 
a clearance so he could work on classified projects. (Tr. 33-34) In 1995, he received a 
bachelor of arts degree summa cum laude from a well-known university. (Tr. 49; AE B, 
C) He received his masters degree in 2001 and his Ph.D. degree in 2005 from a 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
university that is well-known as a leader in Applicant’s area of expertise. (Tr. 49; GE 1; 
AE B, C) He has never served in the military, and he has never married. (GE 1)  
 
Some of the work done in Applicant’s work location is sensitive, but unclassified. 
Identification cards are required at all times. (Tr. 44) If Applicant receives a security 
clearance, it will enhance his ability to contribute to research on behalf of the contractor 
and the U.S. Government. (Tr. 50-51) 
 
Drug involvement2
 
 
In 1988 or 1989, Applicant used Ritalin once or twice. (Tr. 55, 64-65) His Ritalin 
use was recreational and not to help him with his studies. (Tr. 65) In 1989, he received 
a citation for marijuana possession. (Tr. 58) He denied that he possessed the marijuana 
seized by the police. (Tr. 58) Nevertheless, he accepted responsibility for the marijuana 
possession and paid a fine. (HE 3) He believed he should not have to attend a drug 
diversion class because his marijuana possession conviction was unfair. (Tr. 59) In the 
early 1990s, over about a two-year period, he received tickets for expired car 
registration, not attending adult drug diversion class, public nudity (urinating in a public 
area), and a parking violation. (Tr. 71; SOR ¶ 2.a) He was arrested because of the 
outstanding warrants, and he served 14 days in jail. (GE 3) 
 
Applicant began smoking marijuana in 1987, when he was junior or senior in high 
school. (Tr. 51, 61) He frequently used marijuana until age 18 or 19, and then he 
curtailed his marijuana use for about eight years because his girlfriend was opposed to 
marijuana use. (Tr. 52) Then, he resumed his marijuana use, at first with low frequency, 
and later about once or twice a month. (Tr. 52) In 2005, he stopped using marijuana for 
several months, and from about 2006 to July 2010, he sporadically used marijuana. (Tr. 
52) Sometimes he smoked marijuana once or twice a week, and sometimes he 
abstained from marijuana use for several months. (Tr. 52) Around July 2010, he 
stopped using marijuana because he realized that drug use hurt his chances of getting 
a security clearance. (Tr. 52, 63) He never used marijuana at work, and his marijuana 
use did not adversely affect his academic or research work. (Tr. 54) 
 
Applicant equated his history of marijuana use to riding a bicycle on the wrong 
side of the road or jay-walking. (Tr. 62) When he possessed and used marijuana, it did 
not feel like he was committing a crime because his marijuana use never affected his 
work. (Tr. 62-63) He did not store marijuana at his residence, and his marijuana use 
was limited to using a marijuana joint as it was passed around, as opposed to 
possession of a marijuana “stash” and purchasing and providing marijuana to others. 
(Tr. 64; GE 2) 
 
                                            
2 Applicant initially disclosed his marijuana use on his July 27, 2010 security clearance 
application. (GE 1 at 46) Applicant’s history of marijuana use, as described in his September 28, 2010 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), is generally consistent with his 
hearing statement, except he said that he stopped using marijuana in early July or late August. (GE 2 at 
4) For purposes of this decision, I find his most recent marijuana use was in July 2010, shortly before he 
signed his July 27, 2010 security clearance application.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant stopped associating with drug users around July 2010. (Tr. 67) He 
enjoys camping and hiking. In the future, if someone comes to his camp site and uses 
marijuana, he would ask them to leave, or he would leave the camp site himself. (Tr. 75) 
He committed to not using illegal drugs in the future. (Tr. 53) He is willing to participate 
in a drug-testing program. (Tr. 74) He signed a declaration in which he promised not to 
use marijuana or any other controlled substance, and any future use of a controlled 
substance will result in automatic revocation of his security clearance. (Tr. 72; AE A) He 
is not addicted to marijuana. (Tr. 53) He has never received a urinalysis-drug test. (Tr. 
71) After July 2010, he changed. (Tr. 57-59) He is now more mature and responsible. 
(Tr. 57-59)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
A senior scientist, who has worked for the Government for more than forty years 
and has held a security clearance for 20 years, has worked closely with Applicant for 
five years. (Tr. 27-29, 34) He believes Applicant is trustworthy, reliable, and responsible. 
(Tr. 30-31) Applicant shows initiative and supports mission accomplishment. (Tr. 35) He 
is an excellent researcher and one of the organization’s best research scientists. (Tr. 
30, 35) He supports approval of a security clearance for Applicant. (Tr. 27-35) 
 
Another senior scientist, who has a security clearance and has had daily contact 
with Applicant since 2006, supports approval of a security clearance for Applicant. (Tr. 
40-47) She knew him socially; however, she was unaware of Applicant’s continuing 
marijuana use until 2010. (Tr. 43) She believed that he had stopped his marijuana use. 
(Tr. 44) She described Applicant as reliable, dependable, honest, and responsible. (Tr. 
40-43, 47)  
 
One Ph.D. psychologist has known Applicant for nine years (AE F), another 
Ph.D. psychologist has known him for two years (AE G), and a Ph.D. biologist has 
known him for five years. (AE I) They believe he is trustworthy, intelligent, 
conscientious, sincere, responsible, and reliable. (AE F, G) They recommend him for a 
security clearance. (AE F, G) A mental health specialist, who has known Applicant since 
1987, recommends him for a security clearance. (AE H) She lauds his leadership, 
honesty, intelligence, trustworthiness, and responsibility. (AE H)      
 
Applicant’s curriculum vitae and publications show that he is a dedicated 
researcher with strong academic credentials. (AE B, C, D, E) He has excellent potential 
for future contributions to the Department of Defense. (AE B) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”3  and 
“illegal drug possession.” These two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant 
used and possessed marijuana beginning in 1986 until July 2010.4
   
 He admitted his 
marijuana use on his SF-86, to an OPM investigator, in his response to DOHA 
interrogatories, in his SOR response, and at his hearing. He possessed marijuana 
before he used it.  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
                                            
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Drug Enforcement Administration 
listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”5
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated: 
 
  
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, affirmed the 
administrative judge’s decision to revoke an applicant’s security clearance after considering the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating:  
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b both allege that Applicant used marijuana from about 1986 
to about July 2010 and are essentially duplications of each other. SOR ¶ 1.b is 
mitigated as a duplication of SOR ¶ 1.a. 
  
Although there were some lengthy periods where he abstained from marijuana 
use, Applicant’s marijuana use lasted for approximately 24 years from 1986 to July 
2010. He recognized the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse in connection with 
access to classified information. He also understands that possession of marijuana 
violates federal law. I accept Applicant’s statement as credible that his career goals 
have changed sufficiently to create some certitude that he will continue to abstain from 
drug possession and use. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his marijuana-related conduct.6
 
  
Applicant’s ticket for possession of marijuana in 1989 is mitigated due to the 
offense not being recent. (SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant’s abuse of Ritalin about 20 years ago is 
mitigated (SOR ¶ 1.d). He only used Ritalin once or twice, and he has refrained from 
subsequent abuse of this drug. He does not currently associate with drug users, and the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e is refuted.  
 
Applicant demonstrated his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. He has 
not used marijuana since July 2010, which is about 18 months. He signed a declaration 
in which he promised not to use marijuana or any other controlled substance, and 
agreed that any future use of a controlled substance will result in automatic revocation 
of his security clearance. He has broken his patterns of drug abuse, and he has 
changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse drugs 
after being issued a prescription that is lawful under federal law. Marijuana was never 
lawfully prescribed for him under federal law. He did not provide proof of satisfactory 
completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including rehabilitation and aftercare 
requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.    
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in July 2010, about 18 months ago, 
after 24 years of sporadic marijuana use. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are 
evident. Although he previously treated his marijuana use as a very minor offense, like 
jaywalking, he now understands the adverse consequences from marijuana use.7
                                                                                                                                            
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
Notwithstanding his acceptance of the importance of abstaining from illegal drug use, he 
 
6In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
7Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
has not shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse to eliminate 
drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified information. More time without 
marijuana use is needed to fully assure he will not revert to marijuana use, as he has in 
the past after other periods of abstinence. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. As indicated under the drug involvement 
guideline, there is credible adverse information that is sufficient for an adverse 
determination under Guideline H. However, AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies because his arrest in 
the early 1990s for expired car registration, not attending adult diversion class, public 
nudity, and a parking violation creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, and such conduct adversely affects Applicant’s professional standing as an 
employee of a Department of Defense contractor. There is substantial evidence of this 
disqualifying condition, and further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions 
is required.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), and 17(e) apply. Applicant has been candid about his 
conduct, the arrest was not recent, and it is very unlikely to recur. His decision to end 
his marijuana use is a positive step that tends to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
exploitation, or duress. I do not believe that anyone could use Applicant’s history of 
marijuana possession or use or other offenses to coerce him into compromising 
classified information.   
 
AG ¶ 15 indicates that poor judgment can cause reliability and trustworthiness 
concerns, resulting in disqualification under the personal conduct guideline. Judgment 
issues under the personal conduct guideline are more specifically addressed in this 
case under the drug involvement guideline. I find for Applicant under Guideline E 
because those judgment issues are a duplication of the judgment concerns previously 
discussed under Guideline H.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was a junior in high school when he was introduced to using marijuana. He served his 
country as a researcher and has made significant contributions to national defense 
while working for his employer. He provided multiple character references from Ph.D. 
credentialed scientists and others, who enthusiastically support approval of his security 
clearance. He has volunteered to continue to help as a scientist and researcher. He 
stopped using marijuana in July 2010. I am confident that he has the ability to abstain 
from future marijuana use. He has consistently described his history of marijuana use in 
his SF-86, OPM PSI, response to DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, and at his 
hearing. He knows the consequences of marijuana use. There is no evidence of 
disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His character and good 
work performance are important evidence of his responsibility, rehabilitation and 
mitigation.  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Notwithstanding Applicant’s positive attributes, the evidence against approval of 
his clearance is more substantial at this time. Applicant has sporadically used marijuana 
for about 24 years, from 1986 until July 2010. He continued to use marijuana while 
holding an identification card, which he used to access the sensitive military area where 
he worked. He is sufficiently mature to be fully responsible for his conduct. His many 
years of marijuana use shows lack of judgment and “raise[s] questions about 
[Applicant’s] reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” See 
AG ¶ 15. On several occasions in the past, he stopped using marijuana for a significant 
period of time and then resumed marijuana use. His marijuana involvement under such 
circumstances raises a serious continuing concern about his judgment, and a security 
clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude drug involvement concerns 
are not fully mitigated at this time; however, personal conduct concerns are mitigated. I 
am convinced that Applicant is exceptionally intelligent. If he continues to abstain from 
marijuana use, and avoids future offenses, he will eventually have potential for access 
to classified information. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not currently eligible 
for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
