 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 11-02203 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq and lived there until 1991. He returned to Iraq from 
May 2003 to April 2005, from December 2005 to 2007, and from December 2009 to 
February 2010. In the summer of 2007, Applicant married an Iraqi citizen and resident. 
For about 15 months after their marriage, she lived in the United States, and then she 
lived in Iraq from March 2009 to February 2010. He is close to his mother and brother, 
who are living in Iraq. His spouse is close to her father, who is disabled and receives an 
Iraqi Government pension. Although he voted in an Iraqi election, this was an isolated 
action that he believed was encouraged by the U.S. Government. Foreign preference 
concerns are mitigated; however, foreign influence security concerns are not fully 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On June 15, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guidelines C (foreign 
preference) and B (foreign influence). (HE 2) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, 
and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On July 11, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (HE 2) On October 18, 2011, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On October 20, 2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. On 
November 4, 2011, DOHA issued a hearing notice. (HE 1) On December 13, 2011, the 
hearing was held. (Transcript (Tr. 5)) At the hearing, Department Counsel offered two 
exhibits (Tr. 16; GE 1-2.), and Applicant offered ten exhibits. (Tr. 20-27; AE A-J) There 
were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-2 and AE A-J. (Tr. 17, 22-27) Additionally, I 
admitted the SOR, response to the SOR, and the hearing notice. (HE 1-3) I received the 
transcript on December 21, 2011.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN Request) of facts 
concerning Iraq (AN Request with Ex. I to V; Tr. 16-17). Department Counsel provided 
supporting documents to show detail and context for these facts. Applicant did not 
object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 17) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations in his response to the 
SOR (HE 2). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
   
Applicant is a 49-year-old linguist or translator and a recruiter for linguists. (Tr. 6-
7) He was born in Iraq, and he lived in Iraq until he became a refugee in 1991. (Tr. 30) 
He earned an associate’s degree in accounting, which the Iraqi Government funded. 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(Tr. 6, 30) He served in the Iraqi Army for about one year in 1988 to 1989. (Tr. 32-33) In 
1991, he joined the uprising against Saddam Hussein. (Tr. 33-34; GE 2 at 3) When that 
uprising was unsuccessful, Applicant and his brother fled Iraq. (Tr. 33-34, 38; GE 2 at 3) 
After about 30 months in a refugee camp, Applicant and his brother were authorized by 
the U.S. State Department to enter the United States. (Tr. 33-36) In August 1993, he 
entered the United States. (Tr. 35-36; GE 2 at 3) In 1999, he was naturalized as a U.S. 
citizen. (AE G) He worked as a truck driver from 1996 to 2003. (Tr. 37)  
 
From May 2003 to April 2004, Applicant was deployed to Iraq, as a linguist on 
behalf of a Department of Defense contractor in support of Special Operations, and he 
risked severe injury and death on behalf of the United States. (Tr. 38-40) In April 2004, 
his clearance was revoked because of financial problems, including a bankruptcy. (Tr. 
40, 86; GE 2 at 19)2 From April 2004 to January 2005, he worked for the U.S. Embassy 
in Iraq, where a clearance was not required. (Tr. 40)3
 
 From April 2005 to December 
2005, he was a linguist recruiter and worked in the United States. (Tr. 40)   
In June 2005 and December 2005, Applicant went to Iraq to search for a wife. 
(Tr. 40-41; GE 2 at 4) He began working as a linguist for Special Operations from about 
December 2005 to July 2006. (Tr. 41; GE 2 at 12) From December 2005 to August 
2007, Applicant lived in Iraq, except for seven weeks. (Tr. 41-42; GE 2 at 4, 12) During 
this time, he lived with his mother and brother, except when he was on operations on 
behalf of the U.S. Government. (Tr. 42-43) For this two-year period, he also had 
frequent contact with his brother and sister and their families. (Tr. 43) During the 2005 
to 2007 tour in Iraq, he reconnected with his Iraqi friends. (Tr. 44-45)    
 
In the summer of 2007, Applicant married a 27-year-old Iraqi citizen and resident. 
(Tr. 42, 46; SOR ¶ 2.a) She was a teacher in Iraq for about one year before her 
marriage, and she received her pay from the Iraqi Government. (Tr. 49-51) After this 
marriage, Applicant returned to the United States. (GE 2 at 5) In October 2007, his 
spouse received a U.S. Visa. (Tr. 45-46) In 2007, they had a small wedding in Iraq, and 
in 2008, they had a large reception in Iraq, which was attended by about 500 people. 
(Tr. 47, 48) His spouse was threatened in Iraq because she married Applicant and there 
is some residual hostility in Iraq for Iraqis who have become U.S. citizens. (Tr. 57) In 
October 2008, Applicant brought his wife to the United States. (Tr. 46; GE 2 at 14)  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law was paralyzed while on duty as an Iraqi military officer in 
1982, and Applicant’s spouse is his only child. (Tr. 51) He receives a pension from the 
Iraqi Government. (Tr. 52) She has a close relationship with friends and her extended 
family in Iraq, and she frequently communicates with them. (Tr. 52-53) She 
communicates with her father and uncle almost every day. (Tr. 52) 
                                            
2In 2008, Applicant’s security clearance was reinstated. (Tr. 87) 
  
3 An Iraqi linguist (L), who worked for Applicant in his Embassy-related job, was kidnapped and 
killed because of L’s assistance to the United States. (Tr. 77) The terrorists obtained Applicant’s phone 
number from L’s phone and called and threatened Applicant. (Tr. 78) Applicant left Iraq two days later. 
(Tr. 79)    
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In March 2009, Applicant’s spouse returned to Iraq until February 2010. (Tr. 53-
55) In March 2009, she was feeling homesick and was having a difficult pregnancy. (Tr. 
54) She returned to Iraq so that her family could care for her because Applicant did not 
have an adequate support system for her in the United States. (Tr. 54) She attempted to 
return to the United States in July 2009; however, she had medical problems and 
returned to Iraq. (Tr. 55-56) Applicant went to Iraq in December 2009, and he was able 
to bring his spouse and son (his son was born in Iraq in September 2009) to the United 
States in February of 2010. (Tr. 56, 58) Applicant and his spouse have not returned to 
Iraq since February 2010. (Tr. 59)   
 
Applicant’s mother, brother, sister, father-in-law, and various extended family 
members and friends are citizens and residents of Iraq. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.e; HE 2, HE 3) 
Applicant’s father is deceased. (Tr. 61) His brother who lives in Iraq served in the Iraqi 
Army about ten years. (Tr. 31) He is close to his mother and calls her about every two 
weeks. (Tr. 60) His older brother has lived in Iraq his whole life and lives there today. 
(Tr. 61) He is close to his older brother, and he speaks to him when he calls his mother. 
(Tr. 64) His sister was born in Iraq and lives in Iraq. (Tr. 70) His brother-in-law works for 
the Iraqi Ministry of Trade, and his paycheck is from the Iraqi Government. (Tr. 72) He is 
close to his sister; however, he only telephones her about five or six times a year. (Tr. 
72-73) He provides financial gifts to his family living in Iraq. (Tr. 79) His siblings and 
mother in Iraq know he works for the U.S. Government, and his brother knows he is a 
linguist working for the U.S. Government. (Tr. 83-84)  
 
Applicant does not own property in Iraq. (Tr. 79) His equity in his U.S. residence 
is about $30,000, and his total assets in the United States are valued at about $50,000. 
(Tr. 80) 
 
The brother that came with Applicant to the United States in 1991 still lives in the 
United States. (Tr. 65) He became a U.S. citizen in 2000. (AE H) His younger brother 
came to the United States in 2000, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2008. (Tr. 67-68; 
AE I) His younger brother also lives in the United States. (Tr. 67-68)    
 
Applicant conceded that his assistance to the United States places his family 
living in Iraq in danger. (Tr. 75, 84-85) He changed his name to make it more difficult for 
terrorists to connect him with his family living in Iraq. (Tr. 75; GE 2 at 11) Applicant 
wrote, “True Iraqi citizens highly dislike Iraqi citizens and if their family name is found 
out they could be killed.” (Tr. 75)  
 
In 2003, Applicant was working as a linguist in Iraq, and he was injured. (Tr. 18) 
He provided medical records showing he received shrapnel wounds to his right arm, 
right shoulder, and right ankle. (Tr. 19; AE A) He received treatment in a military 
medical facility in Iraq. (Tr. 19; AE A) 
 
Applicant noted:  
 
I was helping the country and I was in very, very difficult operations you 
know, because I’m from Iraq, [and] I put myself and my family in danger at 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
that time when I was working with the military in Special Operations 
because I could lose all [of] my family. They can kill them if they found out 
I was working with the [U.S.] Government. 
 
(Tr. 28) Applicant emphasized that he was loyal to the United States. (Tr. 88) His 
service to the United States involved danger to him. (Tr. 88) He wants to continue 
helping the United States, even though it involved danger to himself and his family living 
in Iraq. (Tr. 88) 
   
Foreign Preference 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges and Applicant admitted that he voted in an Iraqi election in 
2010. (HE 2) Applicant observed that commentators on CNN were encouraging Iraqi-
Americans to vote in Iraqi elections. (Tr. 27) He wanted to stabilize Iraq because that 
would help the United States. (Tr. 27) He voted to make Iraq better and because he was 
proud that Iraq was having free elections. (Tr. 81) He, his spouse, and his two brothers 
living in the United States went to a polling place in a nearby state and voted. (Tr. 28, 
82) He reported that he voted to his security officer three days after he voted. (Tr. 28) 
He promised that he will never vote in an Iraqi election again. (Tr. 28) He votes in U.S. 
elections. (Tr. 83) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s employers describe him has energetic, capable, cheerful, intelligent, 
and innovative. (AE B) He provided diligent, responsive, and highly professional support 
to his company and the Department of Defense. (AE B, E) He earned the respect of his 
colleagues. (AE E) 
    
Iraq4
 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein and his 
Ba’athist regime from power in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal 
from power, the United States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic 
institutions in Iraq. The Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free 
elections in 2005, Iraq’s new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in 
March 2006. On March 7, 2010, Iraqi citizens participated in a new round of 
parliamentary elections. 
 
A substantial portion of Iraq’s exports are in crude oil and crude oil materials, and 
a large amount of those exports went to the United States. The United States’ ultimate 
goal in Iraq is to establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that 
will be an ally of the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has 
invested thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. 
                                            
4The facts in the section concerning Iraq are from Department Counsel’s factual summary, except 
for some comments about the relationship between the United States and Iraq, which are from the U.S. 
Department of State, Background Note: Iraq, May 2, 2011 (AN Report, enclosure I) and U.S. Department 
of State, Country Specific Information: Iraq, May 2, 2011 (AN I, enclosure IV). 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Success in Iraq is a national priority of the United States. On August 31, 2010, the 
United States completed withdrawal of combat brigades from Iraq, and at the end of 
2011, the remaining U.S. military forces withdrew from Iraq.  
 
Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
dangerous, volatile and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with U.S. 
and Iraqi aggressive governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in 
Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as state intelligence services. 
       
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude Guidelines C (foreign preference) and B (foreign influence) are the 
relevant security concerns with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 articulates the security concern relating to foreign preference: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 10 lists various foreign preference conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying stating: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to:  .  .  .  (7) voting in a foreign 
election; 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
  AG ¶ 10(a)(7) applies because Applicant voted in an Iraqi election in 2010. None 
of the other disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 10 apply. Consideration of potential 
mitigating conditions is required. 
 
AG ¶ 11 lists six conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
AG ¶ 11(f) partially applies. Although Applicant did not provide an official U.S. 
Government document showing he was encouraged to vote in the Iraqi elections, he 
receives some mitigation because he reasonably assumed, based on all the publicity in 
the United States about the Iraqi elections, that his voting in that election was consistent 
with U.S. interests. Absent official U.S. Government encouragement to vote in the Iraqi 
elections, foreign preference concerns cannot be fully mitigated under AG ¶ 11. 
Nevertheless, foreign preference concerns are mitigated under the whole-person 
concept, as discussed infra.   
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq and lived there until 1991. From May 2003 to April 
2005, Applicant was deployed to Iraq on behalf of the U.S. Government as a linguist. In 
June 2005 and December 2005, Applicant went to Iraq search for a wife. He returned to 
work as a linguist in Iraq for the U.S. Government in December 2005 until 2007. From 
2005 to 2007, he lived with his mother and brother, except when he was on operations 
on behalf of the U.S. Government. In the summer of 2007, Applicant married an Iraqi 
citizen and resident. She came to the United States in October 2008, and then she lived 
in Iraq from March 2009 to February 2010. He is close to several family members living 
in Iraq. Although he voted in an Iraqi election, this was an isolated action.  
 
Applicant and his spouse live in the same household, and were both born in Iraq. 
Applicant’s mother, his brother, his sister, and his father-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Iraq. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a to 2.d) Although Applicant’s spouse now lives in the 
United States, she is still a citizen of Iraq. She is close to her father. Applicant’s father-
in-law is dependent on the Iraqi Government because he is disabled and dependent on 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
his military pension. Although Applicant has spent about half of his time in Iraq after 
2003, he has served the interests of the United States while in Iraq. His time in Iraq 
does not raise a security concern.  
 
Applicant’s communications with some of his family members living in Iraq are 
frequent and those communications are an objective way of showing he has ties of 
affection for family living in Iraq. His spouse has frequent, almost daily communications 
with her father, who is living in Iraq. In 2011, the Appeal Board stated: 
 
[I]n-laws represent a class of persons who are contemplated by the 
Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.  
 
ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-26176 
at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005)). 
 
Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. His relationship through his spouse 
with her father living in Iraq is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” his family and in-laws living in Iraq. See ISCR Case No. 09-
06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011). He has deep affection for his mother and brother, 
who are living in Iraq. His communications with his sister are less frequent, and 
accordingly, that relationship does not raise a security concern, and that part of SOR ¶  
2.c is mitigated.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with his spouse, mother, and brother, is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if he has a close 
relationship with even one relative, who has a relationship with another family member 
living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See 
Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The close 
relationship of the Iraqi Government with the U.S. Government, reduces Applicant’s 
burden of persuasion to demonstrate that his relationships with his spouse, her family 
and his mother and brother do not pose a security risk. The U.S. and Iraqi Governments 
have very close ties forged through more than eight years of being allies in a conflict 
against insurgents and terrorists. Nevertheless, Applicant should not be placed into a 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist family living in Iraq.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family; 
nevertheless, his relationship with his spouse, his mother, and his brother create a 
potential conflict of interest because his relationship with them is sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in Iraq by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his spouse and brother, and his spouse’s contacts with her 
father. Applicant has strong affection for his mother, his brother, and his spouse. His 
and his spouse’s relationships with family members living in Iraq raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(d) apply, 
and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his spouse, who lives with him, and frequent contact with his mother and brother, who 
live in Iraq. Applicant indicated his wife has frequent contacts with her father, who is 
living in Iraq. He has deep affection for his mother and brother, and his spouse has 
deep affection for her father. Because of his mother, brother, and spouse’s connections 
to Iraq, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationships with his relatives who are Iraq citizens] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established that “[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest.” In 1993, Applicant emigrated to the United States to flee Saddam 
Hussein’s persecution. He became a U.S. citizen. Two of his brothers have moved to 
the United States and become U.S. citizens. His spouse and son moved to the United 
States. Applicant and his spouse have some U.S. property (about $50,000), and they do 
not have any property or investments in Iraq. Most importantly, he has served in Iraq 
with U.S. Armed Forces in a combat zone.  He has shown his patriotism, loyalty and 
fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his spouse and, through her, 
with her father living in Iraq as well as his relationship with his mother and brother, who 
are living in Iraq. His spouse frequently communicates with her father, and he frequently 
communicates with his mother and brother. Her father is disabled and living on a 
pension paid by the Iraqi Government. He is particularly vulnerable to threats and 
coercion. There is also evidence that terrorists or criminals have approached or 
threatened Applicant because of his work for the United States. As such, there is an 
increased possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be targets for improper 
coercion or exploitation. Applicant has taken some measures to disguise his connection 
to his family, such as by changing his name; nevertheless some of his family members 
are aware of his work for the U.S. Government.    
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d), and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Iraq. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with family members living in Iraq. 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies because Applicant has no property or bank accounts in 
Iraq. This mitigating condition can only fully mitigate AG ¶ 7(e), which provides, “a 
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any 
foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through his spouse and mother to family living in 
Iraq, along with his father-in-law’s dependence on the Iraqi Government, and the threat 
and danger to his family living in Iraq, in combination are more significant than his 
strong connections to the United States. His connections to the United States taken 
together are not sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns 
under Guideline B.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are important circumstances tending to support approval of a clearance for 
Applicant; however, they are not sufficient to overcome foreign influence security 
concerns. In 1991, Applicant fled Iraq, and in 1993, he settled in the United States. In 
1999, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. His spouse, who was also born in Iraq, entered 
the United States in 2008. His spouse, son, two brothers, and his brothers’ families live 
in the United States. Applicant and his two brothers are U.S. citizens. Applicant returned 
to Iraq and served with U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist for about four years from 2003 
to 2010. He volunteered to go on hundreds of dangerous missions as part of his 
translator duties, and he was injured by shrapnel in 2003. His employer lauds his duty 
performance and contributions to mission accomplishment. He is 49 years old, and he is 
mature and responsible. He has greater contacts or connections with the United States 
than with Iraq. He does not own property in Iraq, and his property in the United States is 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
valued at about $50,000. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore 
allegiance to the United States. Although he voted in an Iraqi election in 2010, this 
action was isolated, and his vote was under the belief that he was helping both the 
United States and Iraq. Now that he understands the security significance of voting in a 
foreign election and the other Guideline C constraints, he will not take any action that 
shows a foreign preference. His preference and loyalty is clearly for the United States’ 
interests over Iraqi’s interests, and foreign preference concerns are mitigated under the 
whole-person concept.   
 
Applicant has often put himself in harm’s way, working alongside U.S. Armed 
Forces and U.S. State Department personnel. He has made significant contributions to 
national security, fully aware of the risks to himself and his family. All these 
circumstances demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts 
by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant’s strong connections 
to the United States and especially to his U.S. family, community and his employment 
as a translator in a combat zone establish “such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
There are even more significant facts supporting a foreign influence security 
concern because of Applicant’s family connections to Iraq, and the risk that his family 
members face in the event that insurgents, terrorists, or criminals discover his support 
for the United States. Applicant and his spouse live in the same household, and both of 
them were born in Iraq. Applicant’s mother, his brother, and his father-in-law are still 
residents and citizens of Iraq.  
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Iraq must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Iraq, as well as the dangers existing in Iraq.5
 
 Iraq is a very 
dangerous place because of violence from insurgents and terrorists. Insurgents and 
terrorists continue to threaten the Iraqi Government, the interests of the United States, 
U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant 
recognizes his work with the U.S. Government endangers his family living in Iraq. The 
United States and Iraq are allies in the war on terrorism and the United States is 
committed to the establishment of a free and independent government in Iraq. Iraq and 
the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
In ISCR Case No. 09-06457 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011), the Appeal Board 
concluded that an Applicant’s father, who was prominent in the Afghan Government and 
who had guards for protection because of his position, might receive additional danger 
or threats because his son wanted to be a linguist in Afghanistan. The Appeal Board 
explained their rationale for reversing that grant of access to classified information 
stating: 
 
                                            
5 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In the case before us now, those who might be tempted to use Applicant’s 
father as a means of coercion include terrorist organizations that are 
hostile to the U.S. and that are engaged in operations designed to defeat 
our geopolitical goals. As we have previously stated, terrorist activity in a 
foreign country is an important consideration in Guideline B cases. See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
Applicant has frequent contacts with his mother and brother, and his spouse has 
almost daily contact with her father. Applicant’s father-in-law is dependent on the Iraqi 
Government for disability assistance. Applicant conceded that should insurgents, 
terrorists, or criminals discover his U.S. connections, his family living in Iraq would face 
a high probability of reprisal. Applicant’s relationship with his family is well known as 
shown by the large reception his family hosted in Iraq in 2008 to celebrate his marriage. 
His family and his spouse’s father do not receive any special protection from the Iraqi 
Government and are vulnerable should terrorists or insurgents seek to harm them.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not fully 
mitigated the foreign influence security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
