 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-00408 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption), H (Drug Involvement), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct). 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) on September 16, 
2009. On June 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines G, H, J, and E. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2011, and requested a determination on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
 
 2
case on October 14, 2011. On October 18, 2011, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on October 27, 2011, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on December 22, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer to the SOR are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old proposal writer and marketing specialist employed by a 
federal contractor. He is unmarried. He graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree 
in linguistics in December 2008. (Item 4 at 16; Item 5 at 31.) He has worked for his 
current employer since February 2009.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana regularly in high school and in college. He was 
arrested for possession of marijuana and marijuana paraphernalia in May 2002 and 
June 2002. He tested positive for marijuana during intake processing for a drug 
education program in May 2002. After graduating from college, he used marijuana once 
at a concert in December 2009 and once in July 2010 while traveling overseas. (Item 5 
at 7-10.) He continues to associate with several friends who use marijuana; however, he 
asserted that they do not use it in his presence. (Item 5 at 8.) 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant was charged with furnishing alcohol to a minor. Applicant 
had purchased a keg of beer for a party, and about a week later the police were called 
when his younger sibling and some friends found the leftover beer. He received 
probation before judgment, was required to perform community service, and was fined. 
(Item 4 at 43.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in September 2009, he answered “No” to 
question 23a, asking if he had illegally used any controlled substance such as 
marijuana in the last seven years or since the age of 16, whichever was shorter. He did 
not disclose his marijuana use during the preceding seven years. (Item 4 at 43.)  
 
During an interview with a security investigator in July 2010, Applicant disclosed 
his marijuana use in high school and college. (Item 5 at 16.) In his March 2011 
response to DOHA interrogatories, he explained that he failed to disclose his marijuana 
in his SCA because “the wording [of question 23a] was not clear as to the disclosure of 
past usage.” In his responses to these interrogatories, he disclosed that he used 
marijuana regularly from 2000 to 2004. (Item 5 at 7-8, 10.) In his response to the SOR, 
he apologized for his lack of candor on his security clearance application. (Item 3 at 1.) 
 
 In March 2010, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) 
after he ran a stop sign, was stopped by the police, and registered a .11 blood-alcohol 
content on the breathalyzer. During a search of his car, the police found a pill bottle 
 
 3
containing marijuana residue. (Item 5 at 15.) He pleaded guilty to driving while impaired 
by alcohol (DWI) and possession of paraphernalia. He was sentenced to probation 
before judgment. For the DWI, he was placed on unsupervised probation for six months 
and fined $500, with $300 suspended. For the paraphernalia offense, he was placed on 
unsupervised probation for six months and fined $100. The terms of his probation 
required him to enroll in an alcohol education program. (Item 5 at 18.) He began the 
program in April 2010, attended six alcohol education classes and six Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings, and completed the program in September 2010. During his 
intake assessment, he disclosed that he regularly consumed one to four beers once a 
week. (Item 5 at 25.) A certified alcohol and drug abuse counselor determined that he 
was not addicted to alcohol. (Item 5 at 22.) 
 
 The status of Applicant’s security clearance at the time of his marijuana use in 
July 2010 is unclear. His SCA indicated that he had never been granted a clearance. 
There is nothing in the file reflecting that his application for a clearance had been 
granted as of July 2010. In his response to the SOR, he admitted the allegation that he 
used marijuana while holding a clearance, and he stated that he had been debriefed by 
his facility security officer after receiving the SOR and did not have any classified 
materials in his possession. It is possible that he was granted an interim clearance 
before July 2010, but nothing in the record reflects it. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 4
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with DUI in March 2010 (SOR ¶ 
1.a) and furnishing alcohol to a minor in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the 
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” 
 
 Applicant’s arrest for DUI in March 2010 establishes two disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: AG ¶ 22(a) (“alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence, . . . regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”) and AG ¶ 22(c) (“habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent”). While it is 
debatable whether consumption of four beers at a sitting constitutes binge drinking, 
Applicant’s stop-sign violation and DUI reflect impaired judgment.  
 
 
 5
Applicant’s arrest in July 2006 for furnishing alcohol to a minor does not establish 
any disqualifying conditions under this guideline. The SOR does not allege excessive 
alcohol consumption by Applicant on this occasion, and his conduct is more 
appropriately analyzed as criminal conduct under Guideline J, discussed below.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant’s DUI arrest 
was recent, having occurred after he submitted his SCA. The record reflects only one 
incident related to Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption. Applicant regularly 
consumes up to four beers at a sitting, but there is no evidence that he has driven a car 
or engaged in any alcohol-related misconduct on any other occasion. However, his DUI 
did not occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. The fact that Applicant’s 
DUI occurred recently, while he was awaiting a decision on his SCA, raises doubt about 
his good judgment. I conclude that this mitigating condition is not established. No other 
enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged with possession of drug 
paraphernalia in March 2010 (SOR ¶ 2.a), charged with possession of marijuana and 
paraphernalia in June 2002 (SOR ¶ 2.b), and charged with possession of marijuana and 
paraphernalia in May 2002 (SOR ¶ 2.c). It also alleges that he used marijuana with 
varying frequency from 2000 to at least 2004 (SOR ¶ 2.d), used marijuana once in 
December 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.e), and used marijuana once in July 2010 while in a foreign 
country and possessing a security clearance (SOR ¶ 2.f). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Guideline H encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 24(a)(1).  
 
The evidence establishes three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG 
¶ 25(a) (“any drug abuse,” defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction”); AG ¶ 25(b) 
(“testing positive for illegal drug use”); and AG ¶ 25(c) (“illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia”). Rather than speculate on whether Applicant had an 
interim clearance when he used marijuana in July 2010, I conclude that AG ¶ 25(g) 
(“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance”) is not fully established. 
 
 
 6
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established, because Applicant’s drug involvement was recent, frequent, and did not 
occur under circumstances making it unlikely to recur. While I am not satisfied that he 
held a security clearance when he used marijuana in July 2010, the fact that he used 
marijuana while awaiting a decision on his SCA casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). None of the circumstances 
enumerated in this mitigating condition are established. No other enumerating mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct and drug involvement 
as criminal conduct under this guideline. The concern raised by criminal conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” Applicant’s admissions, 
corroborated by the documentary evidence of his criminal record, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted”). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s criminal conduct continued until 
recently and did not occur under unusual circumstances.  
 
Security concerns raised by criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). Applicant has expressed remorse, but his criminal conduct is recent, and he 
presented no evidence of his employment record or community involvement. I conclude 
that this mitigating condition is not established. No other mitigating conditions under this 
guideline are established. 
 
 7
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to disclose his 
marijuana use from 2000 to at least 2004. The concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition is “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, [or] determine security clearance eligibility . . . .” 
AG ¶ 16(a). In his March 2011 responses to interrogatories, Applicant asserted that the 
question regarding drug use was unclear. I found his explanation implausible and 
unpersuasive in light of his college degree in linguistics and his current job, which 
involves use of written language. His level of education is relevant to determining 
whether his failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance application 
was deliberate. See ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). Applicant 
admitted his falsification in his response to the SOR and apologized for his lack of 
candor. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application or during a security interview may be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant did not disclose his drug use until he 
was interviewed by a security investigator in July 2010, nine months after he submitted 
his SCA. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Deliberate 
falsifications on an SCA are not minor, because they undermine the integrity of the 
security clearance process.1 While his one instance of falsification is arguably
                                                          
1 It is a felony to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the 
United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are matters within the jurisdiction of the executive 
branch of the Government of the United States. Thus, a deliberately false answer on a security clearance 
application is a serious crime within the meaning of Guideline J. However, Applicant’s falsification was not 
alleged under Guideline J.  
 
 8
“infrequent,” it did not happen under unique circumstances, and it casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) 
is not established. No other mitigating conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G, H, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant expressed remorse in his answer to the SOR, and there are some 
indications that he is putting his college lifestyle behind him. However, he has recently 
exercised bad judgment with respect to alcohol use and drug abuse, and his lack of 
candor on his SCA raises grave doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines G, H, J, and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol 
consumption, drug involvement, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
 9
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:    Against Applicant2 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
2 I have resolved the allegation that Applicant possessed a security clearance when he used marijuana in 
July 2010 in his favor. However, the remainder of subparagraph 2.f, alleging marijuana use in July 2010, 
is resolved against him.  
