 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00539  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 23, 2011, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel exercised the 
Government’s option to request a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on October 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
 
2 
 
15, 2011, scheduling the hearing for December 8, 2011. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Exhibits (AE) 1 
through 10, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 16, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2009. He is applying for a security clearance. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1999 until he was honorably discharged 
in 2005. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a degree. He is divorced 
with two minor children. He is engaged to be married.1 
  
 Applicant’s employment was sporadic after he left the military. He had periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. He was unable to pay all his bills and a number 
of debts became delinquent.2 
  
 The SOR alleges $8,482 owed for the deficiency on a car loan after the car was 
repossessed, nine other delinquent debts with balances totaling about $1,850, and that 
Applicant owed $17,639 in arrearages for child support. Individual debts are discussed 
further below. 
 
 Applicant and his ex-wife divorced in 2005. Applicant paid his ex-wife his basic 
allowance for housing (BAH) while he was in the military. The judge determined that 
Applicant should have paid more than the BAH, and he ordered that, in addition to the 
monthly child support payments, Applicant owed an amount for arrearages. Applicant 
admitted that, after he left the military, he also fell behind on his monthly child support 
payments. Applicant’s monthly child support obligation is $625, or $7,500 for the year. 
He established that he has been paying $200.69 every week for the last two years, 
through automatic withholding from his pay checks. That weekly amount equals 
$10,435. The amount paid above the monthly obligation goes toward his arrearages. 
Credit reports show the amount owed for arrearages is declining. The May 2010 credit 
report lists the balance of the arrearages as $18,535. The December 2011 credit report 
lists the balance as $16,489.3 
 
 Applicant’s car was voluntarily repossessed in 2006. The holder of his car loan 
told him that he would not owe anything if he voluntarily turned the car in. The May 2010 
credit report lists the debt under one creditor as charged off and transferred, with a zero 
balance. The report also lists the debt under a collection agency, with a balance of 
$8,482. The most recent credit report shows the debt as being owned at some point by 
three different creditors. Applicant stated that he was advised by a financial counselor to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25, 38-40; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 26, 41; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-28; GE 2-4; AE 4, 5. 
 
3 
 
only pay a collection company if it could establish itself as a legitimate holder of the 
debt, and certify the basis for any deficiency owed on the car loan after the car was sold 
or auctioned. Applicant requested that information from the collection company, after 
which the collection company ceased collection efforts. Applicant credibly stated that he 
will pay or settle the debt if a collection company is able to verify that it legitimately 
holds the debt.4 
  
 The SOR alleges nine other delinquent debts with balances totaling about 
$1,850. Applicant established that he paid or settled the remaining nine debts.5 
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling. He paid other debts that were not 
alleged in the SOR. He credibly testified that he intends to resolve all his financial 
issues. He is not accumulating new delinquent debt. His current finances are sound. He 
is able to make payments toward his delinquent debts, and he has a positive cash flow 
that can be used for savings and emergencies.6 
 
Applicant’s fiancée testified that Applicant has been diligently working on 
improving his finances. She described Applicant as trustworthy.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 34-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE 5, 8. 
 
5 Tr. at 29-34, 38; GE 2-4; AE 1-3, 7, 9, 10. 
 
6 Tr. at 38-42; GE 2-4. 
 
7 Tr. at 20-24. 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. 
Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s employment was sporadic after he left the military, including periods 
of unemployment and underemployment. Applicant’s employment problems were 
outside his control. 
 
  Applicant started working on rectifying his financial issues after he was hired by 
his current employer in August 2009. He paid or settled 9 of the 11 debts alleged in the 
SOR. He paid several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. His child support is being 
paid through automatic withholding from his pay checks. He is paying almost $3,000 
annually toward his arrearages, which is satisfactory to the court. Applicant credibly 
stated that he will pay or settle the remaining debt if a collection company is able to 
verify that it legitimately holds the debt. He has received financial counseling. He is now 
in the position where he can pay his current and delinquent debts, and he has a positive 
cash flow that can be used for savings and emergencies.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 
6 
 
 I find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(a) is partially 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. I found Applicant to be honest 
and candid about his finances. I believe he is sincere about resolving his remaining 
financial issues. As indicated above, an applicant is not required to establish that he has 
paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant establish a 
plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
I find that Applicant has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and has 
taken significant action to implement that plan. His finances do not constitute a security 
concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
