 
 
1 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 11-00481 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns related to foreign preference and foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). This action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 5, 2011, Applicant admitted all the factual 
allegations under Guidelines B and C. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
 
 
2 
 
 
September 16, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on September 27, 2011. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 7, 2011, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 2, 2011. The Government offered three exhibits, which I 
admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant offered four 
exhibits, admitted into evidence as Applicant's Exhibits (AE) A through D. I held the 
record open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted 
two documents, which I admitted into evidence as AE E and AE F. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 10, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I took administrative notice of certain facts related to Taiwan, included in 13 U.S. 
Government documents provided by Department Counsel. The facts are limited to 
matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 51 years old, was born in Taiwan. He performed compulsory service in 
the Taiwanese military from 1982 to 1984. In 1986, he came to the United States on a 
student visa, and earned master’s degrees in 1988 and 1990. He completed all 
coursework for a doctorate, except the dissertation. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2004. He married in Taiwan in 2008, and his wife came to the United States in 
2009. Applicant does not have children. For about nine months in 2000, Applicant 
worked as a manager. The company decided to move operations to China. Applicant did 
not want to move to China, and resigned from the company. Applicant was the director of 
software engineering at a technology company from 2001 to 2005. He has worked as a 
software engineer for a federal contractor since 2005. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 17-19, 21-22, 36-38, 
40, 49-50)  
 
Applicant has been a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States since he 
became a naturalized citizen in 2004. He maintained his Taiwanese passport, which 
expires in July 2012. Applicant used this passport to travel to Taiwan once or twice per 
year between 2004 through 2009. He used it because a friend advised him it would allow 
him to avoid long lines while traveling. Its use also allowed him to remain in Taiwan for a 
longer period if a family emergency occurred. He used his U.S. passport for all other 
foreign travel. He was unaware that using a foreign passport represented a security risk. 
During his security interview, Applicant stated that he was willing to bear arms against 
Taiwan. He also noted that he has never voted in Taiwanese elections since leaving 
Taiwan, but does vote in U.S. elections. (GE 1, 3; AE D, E, F; Tr. 19-21, 31-33, 44, 49) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
In the two years since he completed his current security clearance application, 
Applicant's facility security officer (FSO) did not discuss the security implications of 
holding a foreign passport. After the SOR was issued, Applicant questioned his FSO 
about how to proceed. She stated that Applicant might have to surrender his foreign 
passport. He agreed to do so, but was not provided with further instructions. He thought 
it was acceptable to wait until the adjudication process had been completed. Later, when 
he learned the implications of possessing the foreign passport, he surrendered it. The 
FSO provided a letter confirming that, on November 3, 2011, Applicant surrendered his 
Taiwanese passport to her. (AE E; Tr. 40-45) 
 
In 2008, Applicant sponsored his wife’s entry into the United States. She arrived in 
2009, and is now a lawful U.S. permanent resident. She plans to apply for her U.S. 
citizenship when she is eligible. She has earned a cosmetology license and plans to 
begin working in that field. Applicant’s parents, two eldest sisters, and his wife’s parents 
are all deceased. Applicant does not speak with his wife’s family, and any information 
about them is transmitted through his wife. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 22, 38-39)  
 
 Applicant feels he has an obligation, since the death of his parents and sisters, to 
stay in touch with his two remaining siblings, and to visit his family’s gravesites. His 
brother, a taxi driver, is 53 years old. His brother’s wife is a 49-year-old kindergarten 
teacher. In 2007, Applicant told the security investigator that he speaks with his brother 
once or twice per week. During his 2010 interview and at the hearing, he said he now 
speaks with his brother and sister-in-law approximately once per year on holidays. 
Applicant's 55-year-old sister is a chess instructor, and her husband is a homemaker. 
Applicant talks with his sister about two to four times per year by telephone. He rarely 
speaks with his sister’s husband. Applicant most recently saw his siblings when he 
visited Taiwan in 2009. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 24-26)  
 
Applicant does not support his family in Taiwan. However, in 2005 or 2006, his 
sister’s employer decided to move the company to China. She refused to go and lost her 
job. At the time, she also needed eye surgery. Applicant sent her approximately $10,000 
to help her while she was unemployed and to pay for her eye operation. He testified that 
he can no longer help anyone financially, because he is married. (Tr. 34-35) 
 
Applicant's additional foreign contacts include two nephews, one niece, and a 
friend, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He has not talked to his niece in three 
years. Applicant last talked with one of his nephews in 2008. He does not have 
telephone contact with his nephews or niece. Applicant's friend in Taiwan is a university 
professor. They talk once or twice per year. He last saw her at his wedding in 2008, and 
did not contact her when he last visited Taiwan in 2009. None of Applicant's relatives 
have a connection with the Taiwanese government. (GE 3; Tr. 28-31)  
 
During his 2010 security interview, Applicant told the investigator that he had a 
bank account in Taiwan. He explained at the hearing that he did have one before he left 
Taiwan in 1986. However, he is unsure if the account still exists. If it does, the balance is 
 
 
4 
 
 
likely less than one U.S. dollar, and he has not used it 25 years. Applicant owns a home 
in the United States, which he and his wife purchased in 2009. He estimates its value at 
$380,000. He also has bank accounts that total approximately $45,000, and a 401(k) 
account worth approximately $250,000. (GE 3; Tr. 33-34, 45-46) 
 
Applicant has received awards for service during several disasters. In 2008, he 
received an award for his outstanding contributions made under “extremely difficult 
conditions” while he worked on a project for the Veterans’ Affairs. In 2005, he traveled to 
Thailand to help with recovery efforts during the tsunami disaster. In 2001, Applicant 
assisted with post-September 11 identification of victims’ bodies. For two years, 
Applicant helped to streamline the computer process that matched bone fragments to 
specific 9-11 victims to speed the identification process. In September 2003, the New 
York Chief Medical Examiner’s Office of Forensic Biology awarded Applicant a certificate 
of appreciation for his “tireless efforts and selfless dedication to the victims’ families of 
those who perished on 9-11-01.” (AE A, B, C; Tr. 46-49)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Republic of Taiwan (Taiwan)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.1
 
 In 1949, two million refugees 
fled a civil war with Communist forces on the Chinese mainland, and established the 
Republic of China on the island of Taiwan. On the mainland, the Communists 
established the People’s Republic of China (PRC). In the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act 
(TRA), the United States issued the “one China” policy, formally recognizing the 
People’s Republic of China (PRC) as China’s sole legal government.  
 Taiwan and the PRC have significant economic ties, which are attributable to 
their physical proximity and history. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion 
from the PRC, which has not renounced the use of force against Taiwan. Because of its 
geographic location, Taiwan has a particular interest in information from the United 
States that could aid it in its own defense. In 2008, Taiwan nationals were involved in 
cases of industrial espionage and export of controlled items. The United States sells 
appropriate defensive military equipment to Taiwan, in accordance with the TRA.  
 
Taiwan has become a modern multi-party democracy with active public 
participation in government. It is an economic power and a leading producer of high-
technology goods. The United States continues to maintain strong unofficial relations 
with Taiwan that include significant commercial ties; objections to PRC threats to use 
force against Taiwan; support of democratic developments; assurances as to its 
security; and continued arms sales. Commercial connections between the United States 
and Taiwan have expanded since the TRA took effect. Taiwan enjoys Export-Import 
Bank financing, normal trade relations status, and ready access to U.S. markets. 
                                                          
1 The facts regarding Taiwan derive from the documents provided for Administrative Notice. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under Guideline C, AG ¶ 9, states: 
 
                                                          
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
Applicant possessed and used a foreign passport while he was a U.S. citizen. He 
used it primarily to avoid long lines at airports during his travels to Taiwan from 2004 to 
2009. He used only his U.S. passport for other foreign travel. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applied 
during that period. 
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Although Applicant used his foreign passport only for convenience, a desire for 
convenience does not mitigate its use. However, he last traveled to Taiwan in 2009, 
before applying for a security clearance. In addition, he had no knowledge that his use 
would raise security concerns, because his FSO did not inform him. Once Applicant 
understood the security implications of his possession of a foreign passport, he 
surrendered it to his FSO. She provided documentation that it is no longer in his 
possession. Applicant's actions are mitigated under AG ¶ 11(e). 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
 
7 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country do not automatically 
disqualify an Applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only 
disqualifying if they create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict 
of interest. Applicant shares living quarters with his wife, a Taiwanese citizen. He also 
has ties to foreign family members who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He has 
expressed a sense of obligation to stay in touch with them, and he has traveled to 
Taiwan several times since 2004 to visit them. The country in question must also be 
considered in evaluating a Guideline B case. Taiwan has engaged in economic 
espionage, and has economic ties to the PRC, based on history and proximity. 
Applicant's family ties create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation and a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) apply. 
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
 
8 
 
 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant does not have a close relationship with his niece and nephews or his 
friend in Taiwan, and he does not talk with his in-laws. The primary concern is the 
obligation he feels toward his two remaining siblings. However, since his marriage, his 
contacts with them have decreased. They talk a few times per year, and he has not 
visited since 2009. They have no connection with the Taiwanese government. Given his 
strong connections with the United States, his U.S. graduate education, U.S. 
citizenship, long-term residence here, his financial investment in his home, other 
substantial investments, and his service to the Government through his employment 
with a federal contractor, it is unlikely that Applicant would choose his foreign siblings if 
a conflict of interest arose. Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 8(a) and (b) apply. 
 
It is possible Applicant has one bank account in Taiwan. However, he does not 
know if it is still open. If it is, it has virtually no funds, and he has not used it in 25 years. 
He has no property in Taiwan. The value of his home here, coupled with his substantial 
U.S. savings and investments, far outweigh any financial interests in Taiwan. AG ¶ 8(f) 
applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
 
 
9 
 
 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant's ties to Taiwan consist of his wife here in the United States, and his 
siblings, in-laws, niece, and nephews who live there. He has almost no contact with his 
in-laws, niece, and nephews. Although Applicant feels an obligation to keep in touch 
with his siblings, and used to travel there regularly, he has not traveled there in more 
than two years, and expects that his future travel will be less, now that he is married. He 
does not own property or have financial interests there. He has not voted in Taiwanese 
elections, and would be willing to bear arms against it. 
 
I have also considered Applicant's strong ties to the United States. He has made 
his life here for the past quarter-century. He has earned two graduate degrees, and 
worked steadily. He has built up savings and investments. Given his substantial nest-
egg, it is unlikely he would be vulnerable to financial coercion. He has voted in U.S. 
elections. His wife is a lawful permanent U.S. resident, who plans on obtaining U.S. 
citizenship as soon as she is eligible. She has studied here, earned a professional 
certificate, and is planning on a career. Finally, Applicant has contributed significantly to 
his community through his volunteer efforts. Over the past ten years, he has been 
commended for several substantial volunteer efforts. He was recognized for a 
significant two-year contribution to victim identification efforts after September 11. Given 
these U.S. ties, I conclude that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised 
under the guidelines for foreign influence and foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.a(1) – 1.a(3) For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a  – 2.g  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
