 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03507 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 11, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
based on the administrative record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on October 31, 2011. Appellant received the FORM on November 9, 
2011. Applicant was given 30 days to submit additional matters in response to the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional documents. On January 6, 2012, the FORM 
was forwarded to the Hearing Office. The case was assigned to me on January 9, 2012.  
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 2) 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old woman employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor who is applying for a security clearance. She has worked for her current 
employer since September 2009. She is a college graduate. She is single and has no 
children. (Item 4)   
 
From August 2003 to May 2004, Applicant used marijuana, mushrooms (also 
known as psilocybin), and painkillers on approximately 20 or less occasions when she 
was  a  college student.  In 2005, she used marijuana with her mother while driving in a 
car. For as long as she can remember, her mother and step-father have used 
marijuana. (Item 4; Item 5)  
 
In November 2006, Applicant worked for another defense contractor. She was 
given a Top Secret security clearance at that time. On Christmas Eve 2007, Applicant 
was at her mother and step-father’s house. She used marijuana with her mother, step-
father and a friend.  She has not used marijuana since that date. (Item 5) Between July 
2008 and December 2009, Applicant used the drug Ativan, an anxiety medication, on 
two occasions even though it was not prescribed to her. Her mother provided the 
Ativan. (Item 6) 
 
In May 2010, Applicant’s access to sensitive compartmented information was 
suspended by another government agency after issues about her illegal drug use were 
raised during a polygraph investigation. (This is based on Applicant’s admission. There 
is no information in the case file from the government agency about the suspension or 
the basis for the suspension.) (Item 4, section 25; Item 5)  
 
 On July 29, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator conducting her 
background investigation. She told the investigator that she applied for a position with 
another government agency. Part of the process included taking a polygraph. She was 
asked during the polygraph interview whether she had used marijuana or other illegal 
drugs. She admitted to sharing a marijuana cigarette with her mother on Christmas Eve 
2007. The investigator told her that her security clearance would be suspended pending 
further investigation.  Applicant has never sold, grown, or manufactured marijuana. She 
is not dependent on marijuana or any other drug. She has had no drug treatment. She 
has not used marijuana since December 2007 and does not intend to use marijuana in 
the future. (Item 5)  
  
On April 11, 2011, Applicant certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) related to her current position with a DOD contractor.  
In response to section 13C(3) she listed that her security clearance was suspended by 
another government agency on May 27, 2010. (Item 4) In response to section 23, Illegal 
 
3 
 
 
Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, Applicant listed that she used marijuana from December 
2007 to June 2008. She explained further: 
  
The nature of this activity involves a degree of uncertainty. I was 
unknowingly in the vicinity of the described substance an estimated 5 
times as it was being used by family members.  When I was aware that 
the substance was being used I removed my self from the vicinity when 
possible.  A few times the substance was used while I was in a moving 
vehicle and I was not able to remove myself from the vicinity. I felt it was 
necessary to disclose this information because I revealed the information 
during a polygraph as an applicant for [another government agency]. I 
have never failed a urinalysis and I have been tested many times during 
my employment with [Defense Contractor]. I have never been involved 
with the purchasing, selling, or obtaining of this substance. I am not a user 
and am only guilty of being in the wrong place at the wrong time.  
 
Applicant also listed her use of marijuana, mushrooms, and painkillers between August 
2003 and May 2004 while a college student. (Item 4, section 23) 
  
 In response to interrogatories, dated May 5, 2011, Applicant states that choices 
she made regarding marijuana and prescription drugs were reckless and irresponsible 
decisions. She will consent to a random drug test and counseling if necessary. (Item 5 
at 7; Item 6)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use while 
possessing a security clearance raises security concerns under personal conduct. 
Applicant has a substantial burden to mitigate these concerns. The following personal 
conduct security concerns apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information); 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources); and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . .). 
 
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies because her past conduct of using illegal drugs and 
prescription drugs not prescribed to her while possessing a security clearance indicates 
questionable judgment, unreliability, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. Her actions raise an issue as to whether she will properly safeguard 
classified information.    
 
 AG ¶ 16(d) applies because Applicant’s illegal drug use is incompatible with the 
standards expected of individuals entrusted with a security clearance.  Applicant should  
have known this when she decided to use illegal drugs after being granted a security 
clearance.  Her conduct reflects a pattern of rule violations and raises questions about 
her reliability, trustworthiness and judgment.  AG ¶ 16(e) applies because her conduct 
made Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
   
 The following personal conduct mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment);  
 
AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur);  and 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).  
  
 AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply because Applicant chose to use illegal drugs on more 
than one occasion while possessing a security clearance. Using illegal drugs while 
possessing a security clearance is not a minor offense. Applicant was granted a security 
clearance in 2006. She used marijuana in December 2007 and used anti-anxiety 
medication that was not prescribed to her on two occasions between July 2008 and 
December 2009. Her response to section 13C(3) on her April 11, 2011, e-QIP 
application tends to indicate that she may have used marijuana or was near people who 
used marijuana on five occasions between December 2007 and June 2008. Her illegal 
drug use did not happen under unique circumstances making it unlikely to recur. In fact, 
Applicant’s mother and step-father are regular users of illegal drugs. Applicant has been 
exposed to casual illegal drug use her whole life. It is likely that she will continue to be 
exposed to her parents’ illegal drug use in the future.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) does not apply because Applicant has not demonstrated that she is 
taking steps to change the behavior such as undergoing a drug and alcohol evaluation. 
She also has not presented a convincing argument to support her statement that she 
will not use illegal drugs in the future. AG ¶ 17(e) applies because it appears that 
Applicant fully disclosed her illegal drug use. Her vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress has been reduced.  
 
 Overall, Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
raised under personal conduct.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide additional 
information about her duty performance or character. Applicant’s pattern of illegal drug 
use while possessing a security clearance raises security concerns. Applicant has the 
burden to mitigate the security concerns. She did not present sufficient evidence to 
mitigate personal conduct security concerns. Questions about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness remain.  In cases where there is a doubt, a ruling must be 
made in favor of national security. I find there is doubt in Applicant’s case.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
