 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02128 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 30, 2011, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On September 30, 2011, Department Counsel submitted 
 
2 
 
 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
on October 5, 2011, and it was received on October 24, 2011. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not provide additional information. The case was assigned to 
me on January 12, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all of the factual allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He served in the military from 1986 to 1990 and was 
honorably discharged. He married in 2001 and has three children. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since September 2007. 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in May 2006. He obtained two mortgages with his 
wife from the same creditor. They intended to sell the home in three years and buy a 
larger home with the equity from the home they purchased. The housing market fell, so 
they kept the house longer than three years, and the value of the home continued to 
drop. The original purchase price was $575,000, and the value dropped to $355,000. 
Applicant decided to do a “strategic foreclosure” or “strategic default.” He explained he 
“could have stayed in the home but would have been throwing money away due to the 
decreased value of the home.”1 He further stated that he “could have stayed in the 
home until [the] 5 year (2011) mark at which time the mortgage was scheduled to 
adjust.”2
 
 Applicant provided the following response to his interrogatories: 
The subject would not have been able to continue payments at the 
adjusted rate as it was never the intent to stay in the home this long, as 
noted by the desire to sell after 3 years. Furthermore, with a new addition 
to the family in 2009, the size of the home was no longer sufficient for the 
subject. The loan offered payment options (minimum, interest only, full, 
and 15 year) allowing a minimum payment to be made. The minimum 
payment was made during the subject’s entire 4-year occupancy in the 
home. The subject never missed, or was late on a payment until the 
decision to walk away was made. The house was unoccupied from 
September 2009 until the bank assumed it on May 24, 2010. The 
mortgage included the “Power of Sale” clause. The home sold 4 months 
later, on September 15, 2010, for $346,000. The house depreciated 
$229,000 (40%) over 4 years.3
                                                          
1 Item 7. 
 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Id. In his response to the interrogatories, Applicant refers to himself as “subject.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 Applicant told the government investigator that he was a first-time home buyer, 
and the broker told him the home would gain equity and he could use the equity to buy 
a bigger house for his growing family. The home was financed 100%, and the two 
mortgages were opened to cover the entire amount of the loan. The entire amount could 
not be financed with one loan.  
 
 Applicant voluntarily decided to default on his mortgage in September 2009 and 
moved out of the home. The amounts in collection were $537,141 and $114,990. The 
home was foreclosed in May 2010, and the amount of both of the mortgages at the time 
was $632,000.  
 
 Applicant intends to rent a home for awhile and not to make the same mistake 
with the housing market. He is saving money for a down payment on a home in the 
future. He plans to wait for the right time to buy. He indicated he did not have any other 
financial problems or delinquent accounts. He indicated that he was capable of meeting 
his financial obligations but let the house go into foreclosure for “business/strategic” 
reasons. He has never had financial counseling or debt consolidation counseling 
because he has not needed it. His current financial situation is good and he is 
conservative with his money.4
 
  
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR allegation ¶1.a he indicated:  
 
As stated, this amount is the second taken against the property that was 
sold under “Power of Sale” [state] Code of Civil Procedure Section 580b 
applies as stated below as this was our primary residence.5
 
 
In response to SOR allegation ¶1.b he indicated: 
 
As stated, the house sold under “Power of Sale” in the state of California. 
In accordance with [state] Code of Civil Procedure Section 580b, there is 
no deficiency balance.6
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 7. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
Applicant defaulted on two mortgages he had obtained on a home he purchased, 
essentially breaching his contract with the creditor. He made a decision to “walk away” 
from the loans because the value of his home had depreciated. He was unwilling to pay 
the loans on the home he purchased. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise this 
disqualifying condition.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant purchased a home speculating that it would gain value and he would 
be able to purchase a larger home from the equity in the first home. He paid his 
mortgage each month, but made a conscious decision that, because the value of the 
home was depreciating, he would breach his contract with the creditor and do a 
“strategic foreclosure” or “strategic default.” Other payment options were offered to him. 
Applicant stated in his interrogatories that he always paid his mortgage. His decision to 
“walk away” from his legal obligation casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Although, the downturn in the real 
estate market was beyond Applicant’s control, it does not appear that Applicant was 
 
6 
 
 
unable to pay his mortgage. When he purchased the house, he was speculating that it 
would increase in value. It did not, and instead of honoring the contract, he decided it 
was now a bad investment, and he chose to default on it. His actions do not fall within 
the scope of AG ¶ 20(b) as a condition that was beyond his control. Applicant indicated 
he has not received financial counseling because he does not need it. Because 
Applicant has no other delinquent debts alleged and his defaulted loans are 
unenforceable, I find AG¶ 20(c) applies. However, Applicant’s actions do not constitute 
a good-faith effort by him to pay his overdue creditors. His actions are akin to one 
having debts discharged in bankruptcy. Although his debts may not be legally 
enforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and 
circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the 
debt in a timely manner. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant made a 
good-faith effort to satisfy his debts or otherwise resolve them.7
 
 I find AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant bought 
a house and then made a decision to “walk away” from it when its value depreciated. He 
was making monthly mortgage payments. No evidence was provided to indicate that 
Applicant could not afford to make his monthly payments. He indicated his decision was 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. June 25, 2008); ISCR Case No. 01-09691 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 
2003); ISCR Case No. 00-0345 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2001); ISCR Case No. 99-9020 (App. Bd. June 4, 
2001). 
 
7 
 
 
a “strategic foreclosure.” Although his actions may have been legal under his state’s 
law, they raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant defaulted on a contract he made and his personal obligation to pay the 
mortgage. In essence, he chose to make a business decision over a personal 
obligation. His actions raise questions about how he might handle situations in the 
security area when it would be more beneficial to him personally, rather than doing what 
he is obligated to do. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
