                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00226 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard M. McGill, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. Her financial 
problems are attributable to the failure of her private ministry, which left her with a 
substantial amount of debt. She failed to establish that her financial situation is under 
control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that alleges the security 
concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant filed her response to 
the SOR on August 30, 2011 (Answer). She admitted the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing.  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed on September 30, 2011. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for November 29, 2011.2 
Applicant’s counsel appeared on the originally scheduled hearing date and requested a 
delay because his client was unable to appear. I granted the delay and rescheduled the 
hearing for December 8, 2011. Applicant appeared with counsel. Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and B were offered and admitted into 
evidence without objection. The Government did not call any witnesses. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf and called her husband as a witness. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on December 16, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. She has been married for 38 years and has two adult 
children. She received her associate’s degree in 1974 and graduated from seminary 
school in 2003. She was ordained a minister in 2005. She worked for the federal 
government for 34 years, the last 27 years for the Treasury Department. She retired 
from federal government service in July 2010 and the following month started working 
as a government contractor for her current employer. She has never held a security 
clearance.3  
  
 Applicant and her husband, who is also an ordained minister, secured a 
construction loan in 2003 to build a church complex, consisting of a church, daycare 
facility, and low income housing units. The church complex was Applicant and her 
husband’s shared dream and was intended to serve the less fortunate in their 
community. Unfortunately, the church complex never generated sufficient income to 
cover the mortgage and other expenses. Applicant started using her credit cards and 
secured a second mortgage on her home to pay the church’s expenses. By 2008, 
Applicant had reached the limit on her credit cards and stopped paying on them. She 
had also stopped paying the mortgage on the church complex. The bank foreclosed on 
the church property in 2009. The property sold for $150,000, leaving a deficiency owed 
of approximately $700,000.4 
 
 Applicant and her husband filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 
November 2010, in order to stay a state court action filed by the bank seeking the 
$700,000 deficiency owed. The bankruptcy is referenced in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s 
Summary of Schedules notes that she and her husband have over 1.5 million in assets, 
but more than 1.9 million in liabilities. The vast majority of the liabilities are classified as 
unsecured credit, including the $700,000 deficiency and four credit card accounts 
totaling about $119,000.5 These are the same credit cards Applicant used to maintain 
2 On October 26, 2011, Applicant received the original Notice of Hearing. See Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-30; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-40, 46-47, 56-63, 82-85, 89-90, 95-97, 102-109; AE A, Schedule F and Statement of 
Financial Affairs. See also GE 2. 
 
5 AE A, Schedule F. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
the church and stopped paying on in 2008. The four credit card debts are referenced in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f.  
 
Applicant’s Schedule I notes that she and her husband’s combined monthly 
income is approximately $19,400 and their monthly expenses are roughly $17,200, 
which leaves them about $2,200 a month in disposable income.6 The couple’s biggest 
monthly expense is their new home that they had built and moved into in 2005. It is 
worth approximately $729,500, but has two mortgages on it totaling over one million 
dollars. The combined monthly mortgage payment on the home is about $8,800.7 
Applicant and her husband recently filed a reorganization plan with the bankruptcy court 
that calls for them to pay $4,500 per month for 63 months. This plan is pending a 
confirmation hearing. Applicant and her husband are confident the bankruptcy court will 
confirm the plan in January 2012, and they will then start making the $4,500 per month 
payment at that point.8 When asked at hearing how she planned to make this proposed 
payment, in light of what appeared to be a lack of disposable income to afford the 
payment plan, Applicant – after a significant pause – testified that they were going to 
have “to reduce expenses . . . [w]e looked at the Chapter 11 document, and felt . . . that 
(the proposed payment) was a lot, too, but we were going to try to make it work.”9 
Applicant did not elaborate further as to what expenses the couple planned to cut, nor 
submitted a plan showing which expenses they plan to reduce. When asked by her 
counsel whether her expenses had changed since submitting her Schedule I in 
November 2010, Applicant said “no.”10 
 
 Applicant disclosed the foreclosure on the church property and her delinquent 
credit cards on her security clearance application.11 She then discussed her credit card 
debts and the circumstances leading to her financial trouble with a government 
investigator on September 30, 2010. During that interview, Applicant was told by the 
investigator that her credit report also reflected a $106 telephone bill that was in 
collection status. Applicant promised to contact the creditor “within the next couple of 
days” and, “[o]n the outside chance that (the creditor) can prove that this is her debt she 
6 Compare Statement of Monthly Income with Schedule I (Applicant’s husband made voluntary 
decision to retire from government job the same month the couple filed for bankruptcy, which reduced 
their income by about $10,000 a month). 
 
7 See generally AE A, Schedule D, Schedule I, and Statement of Financial Affairs. See also Tr. at 
63-66, AE B at 8. 
 
8 Tr. at 41-45, 78-80, 90. AE A, Case Summary (“pending status: . . . awaiting confirmation 
hearing”). See also AE B, Debtor’s Fourth Amended Plan of Reorganization, at 12 (“In complete 
satisfaction, discharge, and release, the Debtors shall make payments, pro rata, in the amount of $4,500 
per month for a period of sixty-three (63) months. The first payment to unsecured creditors shall 
commence on the 1st day of the fourth (4th) month following the Effective Date.”).  
 
9 Tr. at 69. 
 
10 Tr. at 71-72. 
 
11 GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
will immediately pay it off in one lump sum.”12 This debt is referenced in SOR ¶ 1.e and 
is listed in the bankruptcy documents as one of Applicant’s unsecured creditors.13 
Applicant did not submit documentary proof that she disputed this debt or had 
attempted to resolve the debt prior to filing for bankruptcy. She admits this debt 
“remains unpaid” in her Answer. 
 
 Applicant’s husband testified that despite their “nice home” they live a modest 
lifestyle, rarely eating out.14 He hopes to secure a job in 2012 to assist in paying their 
debts.15 Applicant received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy filing.16 She 
did not submit documentary proof that she attempted to resolve her long-standing debts 
prior to filing for bankruptcy. Applicant’s husband testified that they had made payments 
to the bankruptcy court to pay their debts, but proof of such was not submitted.17  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
12 GE 2. 
 
13 AE A, Schedule F at 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 86-87. But see AE A, Schedule B (own four cars, including a 2010 Ford Explorer).  
 
15 Tr. at 92-93 (“[I]f everything goes right,” Applicant’s husband anticipates receiving a job offer, 
with a starting salary of about $100,000 per year). See also Tr. at  80-82, 110. 
 
16 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
17 Tr. at 78-80. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.18 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
awarded a clearance, he (or she) actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”19 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of a substantial amount of debt – over $100,000 in 
credit card debt alone – was not a result of frivolous consumer spending, but instead in 
pursuit of a dream to build a church and related facilities to serve others. Her aspirations 
are clearly noble, but the amount of debt she voluntarily took on in pursuit of her dream 
and the manner in which she has handled the substantial debt she accumulated directly 
18 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
19 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
implicates the financial considerations concern. The credit card debt alone has been 
outstanding since 2008. The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 were also 
established:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income 
ration, and/or other financial analyst. 
 
 An applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”20 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20. I have considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 and 
only the following warrant discussion:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problem is directly tied to the failure of her ministry. She has 
taken the initial steps to resolve the substantial debt that resulted from this “business” 
failure. She has also received financial counseling and secured a well-paying job to pay 
her debts. However, the evidence does not support the application of the above 
mitigating conditions, nor mitigate the financial considerations concern.21  
  
 Applicant did not submit any documentary evidence that she attempted to 
resolve her long-standing debts prior to filing for bankruptcy or that she had made 
20 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
21 See generally ISCR Case No. 07-09304 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2008) [Appeal Board sets out 
parameters for application of AG ¶¶ 20 (b) – (d), including requirement that an applicant act responsibly 
under the circumstances in order to establish AG ¶ 20(b)]. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
payments towards any of her debts.22 Applicant’s reorganization plan was still pending 
a confirmation hearing as of the close of the record.23 The Appeal Board has held that 
“[p]romises to take actions in the future, however sincere, are not a substitute for a 
documented track record of remedial actions.”24 In the present case, Applicant 
promised, during the course of the current security clearance investigation, to pay the 
minor telephone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but failed to do so. Such inaction over a 
relatively minor debt speaks far more to the applicability of the mitigating conditions 
under consideration than her proposed reorganization plan and other favorable 
evidence. Further, her proposed reorganization plan is contingent upon cutting 
significant expenses and/or her husband securing a job to meet the required $4,500 per 
month payment. Applicant had not seriously contemplated how she was going to meet 
this legal commitment prior to being asked at hearing. In short, although some favorable 
evidence exists, Applicant failed to establish any of the mitigating conditions. Her 
financial problems remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating factors in this case. Applicant 
worked for the federal government for 34 years. She found herself in financial trouble 
trying to serve her community. These are significant mitigating factors. However, she 
has a substantial amount of unresolved debt and failed to dispel the significant security 
concerns raised by her financial situation. The favorable whole-person factors present in 
22 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present 
documentation to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue). 
 
23 See generally ISCR Case 10-08308 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011) (applicant’s recent bankruptcy 
filing, which was still pending at close of the record, was insufficient to overcome history of not paying his 
financial obligations). 
 
24 ISCR Case No. 99-0012 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
this case do not outweigh the security concern at issue.25 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is therefore denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
25 See generally ISCR Case 10-04405 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011) (an administrative judge’s 
finding that an applicant is “a person of good character” under the whole-person concept does not 
necessarily equate with a finding that an applicant has mitigated the security concern at issue). 
 
