 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-05259
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant used marijuana, at times frequently, when he was in college and for
about 18 months after he graduated. He occasionally purchased small amounts of
marijuana for his personal use during that time. In the past 18 months, Applicant has
abstained from any illegal drug use, he has changed his personal and professional
circumstances for the better, and he sufficiently demonstrated an intent not to use drugs
in the future. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
a security clearance is granted.
On January 24, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant interrogatories  to clarify or augment information in the  background1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant’s
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant2
access to classified information. On June 22, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if established, raise security
concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the adjudicative guidelines3
(AG).
On October 3, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR through a notarized
statement and requested a decision without a hearing. On November 3, 2011,
Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the4
Government’s preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on November 14,
2011, and was given 30 days to file a response to the FORM. On December 8, 2011,
Applicant responded to the FORM by submitting an eight-page memorandum and four
enclosed exhibits. His submission was included in the record without objection. The
case was assigned to me on January 3, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana from
April 2006 until July 2010 (SOR 1.a), and that he has purchased marijuana (SOR 1.b).
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, both SOR allegations. In
addition to the facts established through his admissions, I have made the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is 26 years old and works for a defense contractor as a logistics
support analyst, a position that requires a security clearance. He has worked for his
current employer since November 2010. From July 2004 until December 2008,
Applicant attended a college in the southeastern United States, where he received a
bachelor of science degree. From 2007 until he was hired by his current employer,
Applicant held part-time and full-time jobs in a variety of fields unrelated to his current
career. He also was unemployed several times during that period. Applicant is now
engaged to be married to a woman whom he listed in his eQIP as a cohabitant. (FORM
Items 4 and 5; Response to FORM)
When Applicant submitted his eQIP, he disclosed that he had used marijuana
between 2006 and 2010. More specifically, Applicant averred that, when he was in
college between April 2006 and January 2009, he smoked marijuana between four and
 Directive. 6.3.5
3
ten times weekly, estimating that his total use was about 700 times during that period.
Applicant further stated that he stopped using marijuana between January 2009 and
June 2009. However, after he graduated, he used marijuana between three and four
times weekly between June and September 2009, estimating his total use was between
36 and 48 times during that period. From September 2009 until July 2010, Applicant
stated he used marijuana once or twice daily between five and seven days weekly, for
an estimated total of 400 times before his last use. Applicant also disclosed that he
bought small amounts of marijuana for personal use. (FORM Item 5)
Applicant passed a drug screening when he was hired by his current employer.
He is subject to random drug screening, but he has not tested positive for any banned
substance since he started his current job. (FORM Item 6; Response to FORM)
Applicant attributed his drug use until January 2009 to immaturity while he was in
college with no responsibilities. After college, he claimed he used marijuana to help him
cope with his inability to find suitable employment, which, combined with the financial
strain of his student loans coming due, created a lot of stress. Applicant also averred
that, in 2009, his father and stepmother were in the throes of a contentious divorce.
Because of his employment difficulties, Applicant and his girlfriend had to live with his
parents for a time, and he was forced to witness the deterioration of their marriage and
the adverse effects it had on his entire family. This caused additional stress that he tried
to ease through frequent marijuana use. (Id.)
Applicant also averred he now knows his use of marijuana was wrong despite the
reasons he used it. He decided to stop his use of marijuana in 2010 so that he could
adopt a more responsible, productive lifestyle for him and his fiancee. Applicant is in a
stable personal relationship, and he no longer associates with people who use illegal
drugs. He has moved to a different part of the country to live and work, and he is wholly
removed from his previous social, work, and family environments. (FORM, Items 4 - 6;
Response to FORM) Applicant also submitted a notarized statement of intent not to use
illegal drugs with the understanding that doing so will result in the loss of his clearance.
(Response to FORM, Enclosure 4) Applicant has also established a positive reputation
at work for being conscientious, reliable, dedicated, and mature. His supervisors and
co-workers recommend him for a position of trust because of his integrity and honesty.
(Response to FORM, Enclosures 1 - 3)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of
persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary7
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information
in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Drug Involvement
The Government presented sufficient information to show that Applicant used
marijuana extensively from 2006 until July 2010. The Government’s information also
established that Applicant purchased small amounts of the drug for his personal use
during that period. These facts raise a security concern addressed in AG ¶ 24 as
follows:
5
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). 
By contrast, the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation;) must be considered here.
Applicant stopped using drugs about four months before he was hired by his
current employer. His use began through commonplace college behavior, but continued
after graduation until he decided to adopt a more responsible lifestyle. Also, he has
changed his personal and professional circumstances for the better, and he is no longer
subject to the same social or family influences that were present when he used
marijuana. Applicant has been subject to random drug screening with no positive results
since he passed a drug test when he was hired by his current employer. Finally,
Applicant submitted a notarized statement averring that he will not use illegal drugs in
the future, and that he understands he will lose his clearance if he does so. All of the
information about Applicant’s change of circumstances and his future intent regarding
illegal drug use supports a conclusion that Applicant is not likely to engage in such
conduct again. The mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) apply, and
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns about his illegal drug use.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 26 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He is well educated and is now employed
in a professional circumstance for the first time since he left college. Three supervisors
from his place of work speak highly about his integrity and overall trustworthiness. The
circumstances surrounding Applicant’s use of drugs are no longer present. Applicant’s
maturity and reliability are further demonstrated by the detailed candor with which he
answered the pertinent questions in his security clearance application. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information bearing on Applicant’s past and
current circumstances shows that Applicant is not likely to engage in future conduct that
will raise doubts about his ability to protect the Government’s interests as his own. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
