 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00713    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Frederick W. Schutz, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The SOR alleges that Applicant 
owes approximately $63,500 in delinquent debt to 15 creditors. Applicant’s delinquent 
debt resulted from events beyond her control. She is currently participating in a student 
loan rehabilitation program and has resolved the delinquent accounts with her 
remaining 14 creditors. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 on August 25, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual basis for 
the action under the adjudicative Guideline F, financial considerations.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The hearing proceeded 
as scheduled on December 6, 2011. Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through P were admitted without objection. I left the record 
open until January 6, 2012 for Applicant to submit additional documentation regarding 
her finances. She timely submitted AE Q through W, without objection from Department 
Counsel.2
 
 I received the Transcript (Tr.) on December 13, 2011. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old, single mother of a 7-year-old daughter. She received 
a bachelor’s degree in business administration in 2007. Applicant financed her 
education with student loans. She has worked as a government contractor since 1998 
and has been with her current employer since 2003. She has held a security clearance 
since 2001.3
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to 15 creditors for approximately 
$63,500. The majority of the delinquent debt falls into three categories: education debt 
($44,391), consumer credit ($17,067) and medical debt ($2,042). Applicant started 
having financial problems in the early 2000s after being injured in a car accident. When 
she began to accumulate delinquent debt, she enrolled in a debt consolidation program 
and paid off her debt in three years. Despite being debt free, Applicant continued to live 
paycheck to paycheck.4
 
 
 In 2006, Applicant began experiencing financial problems again, as a result of 
undiagnosed medical issues. In absence of a diagnosis, Applicant’s insurance company 
refused to cover the costs associated with any diagnostic testing or pre-diagnosis 
treatments. In 2008, she was involved in another car accident that was not her fault. Her 
car was declared a total loss and she incurred medical costs associated with injuries 
sustained in the accident. Her financial problems were further exacerbated in 2009 
when her student loans entered repayment status. In September 2010, Applicant again 
enrolled in a debt consolidation program for assistance in resolving her mounting 
delinquent debt. Under the debt consolidation program, Applicant paid $1,800 toward 
her delinquent debt. In February 2011, she enrolled in a student loan rehabilitation 
program. She has successfully completed the program and is now eligible to refinance 
the loans under more favorable terms.5
 
 
                                                          
2 The Government’s Post-hearing Memorandum is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
3 Tr. 31 – 35. 
 
4 Tr. 40, 44-46; Answer to SOR.  
 
5 Tr. 38-40, 61-63, 70-71; AE B. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant tried to resolve her financial problems on her own, not realizing the 
implications the delinquent debt would have on her security clearance. After receiving 
the SOR, she asked her parents for help. Applicant’s parents provided financial 
counseling and gifted her $4,000 to help her resolve her delinquent debt. In addition to 
the gift from her parents, Applicant borrowed against her 401K to resolve some of her 
outstanding medical debt. In November 2011, she received a $7,400 settlement from 
her 2008 car accident. She used the windfall to pay off her remaining delinquent debt. 6
 
  
To date, Applicant continues to make timely payments on her student loans and 
is currently on the lender’s wait list for refinancing.  She has paid or settled all of the 
delinquent debt alleged in the SOR. Applicant does not have any open consumer credit 
accounts and has not accumulated any new debt. The current balance on her 401K 
loan is less than $250. She has received a definitive diagnosis of her medical issues 
and expects her treatment and medications to be covered by her insurance company 
going forward.7
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
6   
 
7 GE 3; AE Q, S.  
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that are 
applicable here: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant became overwhelmed by medical bills, car repairs, and 
student loan expenses that exceeded her income. For the next four years, she 
accumulated delinquent debt because she could not afford to pay her creditors.  
 
The following mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 20 apply: 
  
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 Applicant’s financial problems are the result of two conditions beyond her control: 
an undiagnosed medical condition and a car accident. Her finances were stressed even 
more when her student loans entered repayment status. Applicant acted responsibly by 
enrolling and participating in a debt repayment program. When she realized she was in 
over her head, she consulted her parents for financial counseling. In addition to the 
payments she made under her debt repayment program, Applicant used her available 
resources to resolve her delinquent debt: the gift from her parents, a 401K loan, and the 
windfall she received from her 2008 car accident.  Applicant’s efforts constitute a good-
faith effort to resolve her indebtedness. Based on the evidence, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline F concerns. 
 I have no reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person concept. Applicant approached her financial problems well 
before the concern was raised by this current security clearance investigation. She has 
demonstrated a positive history of repayment of her debts. While her finances may 
remain strained by her circumstances, her financial problems are not indicative of poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to pay her debt. She has 
demonstrated the opposite. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns.  
Formal Findings 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.gg:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
