 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-05283 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 1, 2011, and DOHA received his 
answer on August 8, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
September 28, 2011. The case was assigned to me on October 14, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on October 17, 2011, scheduling the hearing for October 
31, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were received into evidence without objection, and he testified on his 
own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until November 18, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant submitted AE F 
through G, which were received into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on November 8, 2011. The record closed on November 18, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1d. His 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. I found Applicant’s testimony to be 
credible. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old field service representative, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2010. Upon being hired, he was granted an 
interim secret security clearance and deployed to Afghanistan. However, his interim 
security clearance was revoked as a result of these proceedings and he was required 
to return to the United States. Applicant seeks a security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. He has been assured by his employer that 
he will be allowed to resume his duties in Afghanistan if he successfully vets for a 
security clearance. (Tr. 11-12, 15-17, 59-60, GE 1, AE D.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1978. He served in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from in June 1978 to March 1988, and was honorably discharged as a 
sergeant (pay grade E-5). While assigned to Headquarters, Marine Corps, Applicant 
was granted a top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
information. Applicant’s military occupational specialty was 0121 (personnel clerk) and 
8511 (drill instructor). During Applicant’s ten years in the Marine Corps, he was 
deployed to Okinawa two times and finished his enlistment as a drill instructor at 
Parris Island. He was awarded the Defense Meritorious Service Medal as a sergeant 
while assigned to the Rapid Development Joint Task Force, which is now part of U.S. 
Central Command, MacDill AFB. (GE 1, Tr. 17-20, 27-29.) 
 
After Applicant’s Marine Corps service, he completed 20 plus years with a 
major metropolitan police department from April 1988 to June 2008.  During his time 
with the police department, he was assigned to one of the most violent sections within 
his department’s jurisdiction. After “doing his time” on the streets, he applied for and 
 
3 
 
 
was accepted to the SWAT team. He retired from the police department after 
completing 13 years with the SWAT team as a senior sniper and as his department’s 
senior breacher. (Tr. 20-21, 30.)  
 
Applicant was previously married from September 1982 to July 1988, and that 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in November 1991. Applicant has a 27-year-
old daughter who lives with his former wife, and a 16-year-old son who lives with him 
and his second wife. His wife is currently working two jobs – as an interim chief 
financial officer (CFO) and as a consultant. She was recently offered a permanent 
position as CFO with an anticipated annual salary of $83,000 starting in November 
2011. (GE 1, Tr. 21-24.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his November 2010 e-QIP, his two sets of May 2011 DOHA 
Interrogatories; as well as his December 2010 and May 2011 credit reports. (GE 1 – 
5.) Applicant’s SOR alleged eight separate debts totaling $67,732. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1h.) 
 
Upon Applicant’s retirement from the police department in June 2008 located in 
State A, he and his wife decided to relocate to a warmer climate in State B where they 
planned to continue working and eventually retire.  Applicant and his wife sold their 
home in State A, and in the process lost their home owners income tax deduction for a 
period of time until after they moved to State B and purchased a home. Applicant 
found employment in State B as a manager of a well-known cigar store earning 
approximately $400 per week, and his wife found employment as a CFO for a non-
profit company with an annual salary of $84,000. After settling in State B, Applicant 
and his wife were living comfortably within their means. Then in November 2009 
without warning, Applicant’s wife was laid off. Despite her efforts to find employment, 
she remained unemployed for almost two years.  (Tr. 30-32, 41-43, 59-62, 65, 67-69.)  
 
Applicant had factored his wife’s income into his family’s standard of living and 
budget. This sudden loss of income wreaked havoc on Applicant’s financial situation 
and led to the debts listed in the SOR. Applicant and his wife never had financial 
problems until this time. In fact, they maintained a sterling credit record and were able 
to purchase their new home in State B without difficulty. (Tr. 42-46, GE 2 – GE 5.) To 
address his debts and family income shortfall, Applicant sought a job from his current 
employer. His compensation was set at $12,516 per month while deployed to 
Afghanistan and he reasonably anticipated that he would be debt-free in a relatively 
short time. As noted above, Applicant was required to return to the United States after 
he was in Afghanistan for approximately two months, and he is currently receiving 
unemployment benefits. (Tr. 46-50 56-57, 69.) 
 
When Applicant was unable to pay his creditors, he contacted them to apprise 
them of the change in his financial situation. Some of the creditors were willing to work 
with him, and others were not. In spite of Applicant’s current income shortfall, he has 
 
4 
 
 
managed to put together a plan that addresses all of his debts. Specifically, he has set 
up a comprehensive payment plan that addresses seven of the eight SOR debts 
alleged (SOR ¶¶ 1b – 1h). Once Applicant has made sufficient headway with those 
seven debts, he plans to address his last remaining large debt (SOR ¶ 1a). His 
monthly budget reflects that Applicant lives a modest lifestyle and further 
demonstrates that he is living within his means. Applicant’s monthly income is 
currently derived from his police department pension ($3,038), his unemployment 
benefits ($968), and his wife’s income ($5,194), for a total monthly income of $9,200. 
His net monthly remainder after paying all his bills is $2,928, which he is applying to 
his SOR debts. (Tr. 49-54, 56-58, 69-76, 78-80, AE E – G.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has a viable plan in place for making payments to 
seven of the eight creditors. When Applicant has made sufficient headway with those 
creditors, he plans to pay off that remaining creditor. Applicant remains current on the 
rest of his monthly bills. His budget further demonstrates that he maintains a modest 
lifestyle and is living within his means.   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted two work-related reference letters. The first letter is from a 
senior trainer (ST) with a defense contractor, who was familiar with Applicant’s in-
country performance while in Afghanistan. The ST stated that he would “not only trust 
[Applicant] with the handling of classified material but with my life also.” He provided 
ample comments in his reference letter to justify such a statement. (AE C.) 
 
The second letter is from the director of operations (DOO) of his sponsoring 
defense contractor. The DOO discussed Applicant’s work performance and 
contribution to their mission in Afghanistan. It is clear that the DOO views Applicant in 
a very favorable light. His comments perhaps are best summarized, “…the loss of 
[Applicant] … in Afghanistan is a great loss to the warfighters and commanders in that 
theater …. He was the “poster child” of the type of individual we wanted downrange 
assisting in the current US combat operations.” The DOO concluded by saying that his 
company would welcome Applicant back. (AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1a to 1h, he had eight delinquent debts 
totaling about $67,732 that have been in various states of delinquency for several 
years. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his wife’s sudden, 
unexpected lay-off in November 2009 that resulted in the loss of $84,000 of income 
was beyond his control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Even 
 
7 
 
 
though he did not have the funds for full repayment, he remained in contact with his 
creditors during this timeframe and has taken reasonable steps to resolve his debts.1
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable even although Applicant did not seek financial 
counseling. He has, however, produced evidence that reflects he is living within his 
means and has regained financial responsibility. There are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to 
establish partial if not full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2
 
 Applicant has paid, is paying, 
is attempting to pay, or has otherwise resolved seven out of eight debts. Applicant 
indicated that he will address that remaining debt when able to do so. Given the funds 
available to him, his plan is reasonable and prudent. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable 
because Applicant has not challenged the legitimacy of the debts. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s record of military service and superb employment weighs in his 
favor. There is no evidence of any security violation during the time Applicant may 
have held a security clearance. He is a law-abiding citizen. He is current on his day-to-
day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts are being addressed in a 
meaningful and thoughtful manner. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in 
the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant established a meaningful plan for resolving his debts. He is making a 
significant contribution to the national defense. His company fully supports him and 
recommends him for a security clearance. Due to circumstances beyond his control, 
his debts became delinquent. Based on his background and demonstrated record of 
trustworthiness, there is sufficient reason to believe that Applicant will overcome this 
temporary setback. Until his wife lost her job, he has established a history of financial 
responsibility. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s ten years of military 
service in the Marine Corps, his 20 years of high risk service as a police officer, his 
years of financial responsibility before falling into debt, his plan for financial recovery 
and substantial steps he has taken to resolve his financial situation, his potential for 
future service as a defense contractor in a demanding and critical position in 
Afghanistan, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-
person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a to 1h:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
