 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01062 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines F 
(Financial Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on June 25, 2010. On May 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On June 24, 2011, Applicant answered the 
 
2 
 
 
SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2011. 
DOHA issued the Notice of Hearing on November 17, 2011. The hearing was held as 
scheduled on December 6, 2011. Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 
that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through L that were admitted into evidence without objection. The record 
was left open until December 13, 2011, to provide Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional matters. In Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, she requested a one-week extension of 
the deadline that was granted. She timely submitted AE M through P that were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s email reflecting that she had no 
objections was marked as HE 2. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
December 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked at 
her current job since February 2005. She graduated from high school in 1986 and 
obtained an associate’s degree in Business Administration in 1999. She has been 
divorced twice and has a 27-month-old son. She has held a security clearance since 
2005 without any security violations.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had 21 delinquent debts totaling $22,651. In her 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 13 allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 
1.l, 1.m, 1.p, 1.r, 1.s, 1.t, and 1.u). She did not respond to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.o in 
her Answer, but admitted that debt at the hearing. She denied the remaining seven 
allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.n, and 1.q). Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. Substantial evidence of the alleged debts is 
contained in credit reports dated July 28, 2010; April 15, 2011; and November 22, 
2011.2 
 
Applicant’s debts fall into two categories. First, two of her debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.p) are the first and second mortgages on her home. Second, the remaining debts are 
medical debts. She attributed her financial problems to her most recent divorce and 
medical complications arising from the birth of her child. She married her second 
husband in October 2005. They separated in 2007 and divorced in August 2008. Her 
son was born in September 2009 through a Caesarian section delivery. This was a high 
risk pregnancy requiring emergency room visits.3 
 
At least eight of the alleged medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.q, 1.r, 1.s, 
and 1.u) are not associated with the birth of Applicant’s son because they were placed 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 37-38, 43, 58; GE 1. Applicant’s e-QIP reflected that she has worked for two employers 
at the same address since February 2005. 
2 Tr. 12-13; GE 1-4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
3 Tr. 15-17, 32-36, 50-58; GE 1-4; AE H, I. 
 
3 
 
 
for collection between May 2005 and May 2008. At the hearing, she claimed that she 
paid seven of the alleged medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, 1.i, 1.k, 1.n, and 1.q), 
which are also the debts that she denied in her Answer. In her post-hearing submission, 
she provided proof that she paid four of them (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.k, and 1.n) totaling 
$572. SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were paid in April 2011, while 1.k and 1.n were paid in 
December 2011 after the hearing. Her post-hearing submission also noted that she 
could not determine if three of the denied debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.q) were paid. 
Consequently, SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.q remain unresolved. Her fifteen unresolved 
medical debts total $4,359. At the hearing, she indicated that she was not currently 
negotiating with any of the medical creditors. She plans to use her next tax refund to 
pay the remaining delinquent medical debts.4 
 
Applicant and her then husband purchased a home together in September 2005. 
The primary mortgage on the home (SOR ¶ 1.a) was for $184,000 and the second 
mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.p) was for $23,000. The combined monthly mortgage payments 
were about $1,500. The primary mortgage was an interest-only loan so she has no 
equity in the house. She moved out of the house when they separated in 2007. She was 
awarded the house in the divorce decree and returned to the home when her ex-
husband moved out in May 2009. When she moved back, she had planned to take in 
renters to assist her with the mortgage payments. At that time, however, she was 
pregnant. After her son was born, she did not arrange for renters because she was 
concerned about having renters with a newborn child.5 
 
Applicant depleted her savings in making mortgage payments. She stopped 
paying the mortgages in February 2010. The following month, she applied for a loan 
modification program, but was unable to obtain such assistance because her ex-
husband declined assistance. His cooperation was needed because the home was in 
both of their names. In May 2010, Applicant informed her employer that she was 
experiencing financial difficulties. In July 2010, she and her ex-husband listed the home 
for sale at a price less than the mortgage. At some point, she also sought to dispose of 
the home through a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Her efforts to dispose of the home were 
unsuccessful. She noted that a factor hindering those efforts was that her ex-husband 
was at times either not cooperating or could not be found. She vacated the home in 
August 2011, and surrendered it to the mortgage company in November 2011. She 
indicated that she moved out to accelerate the foreclosure process. The home is 
currently in foreclosure, but has not yet been sold. Once the home is sold, she will she 
will learn the amount of the deficiency that she owes. She indicated that she might file 
                                                          
4 Tr. 45-47, 50-53; GE 2-4; AE J, M-P. In AE H, Applicant indicated that she was in the process of 
working with a debt consolidation company on the medical debts. At the hearing, she provided no 
evidence that she executed a debt consolidation plan. The medical debts that predate the birth of her son 
were placed for collection as follows: SOR ¶ 1.u in May 2005, ¶ 1.m in February 2006, ¶ 1.o in February 
2006, ¶ 1.r in April 2006, ¶ 1.n in May 2006, ¶ 1.l in June 2006, ¶ 1.q in December 2007, and ¶ 1.s in May 
2008. See GE 4. Her most recent medical debt, SOR ¶ 1.e, was placed for collection in August 2010. 
5 Tr. 15-17, 32-36, 38-41, 53-58; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 
 
 
bankruptcy or apply for a debt relief program, if such a program is available, to resolve 
this indebtedness.6 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling that included advice on loan 
modifications and foreclosures. She is currently renting an apartment and meeting her 
present financial obligations. She has no credit cards. She testified that each month she 
has approximately $200 in discretionary funds. Her budget reflected that her monthly 
income was $2,417 and her monthly expenses were $2,279, but did not include any 
payments on her delinquent debts. Until recently, she has not received child support. 
She indicated that her son’s father will be paying her son’s medical insurance payments 
and her electrical bill.7 
 
Applicant submitted a number of reference letters attesting to her character. They 
describe her as dependable, honest, hardworking, and a person of integrity. Her former 
supervisor indicated that Applicant is a trustworthy employee and recommended her for 
a security clearance. In her most recent work performance evaluation, Applicant 
received “outstanding” in each performance criteria. Over the past four years, she has 
consistently received “outstanding” or “above average” grades in her evaluations. She 
has also received a number of certificates of appreciation for her work contributions.8 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
                                                          
6 Tr. 32-36, 43-45, 50-58; GE 1, 2; AE D-H; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
7 Tr. 32-33, 41-43, 47-48, 58-59; AE K, L. 
8 AE A-C. 
 
5 
 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated 21 delinquent debts totaling over $21,000 that she was 
unable or unwilling to satisfy for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant is delinquent over $17,000 on two mortgages. Her home is in 
foreclosure. She will not know the total amount she owes on the home until the 
foreclosure process is completed. She also owes about $4,000 on 15 unresolved 
medical debts. A number of those medical debts were placed for collection five or six 
years ago. She has received financial counseling, but provided no definitive plan for 
resolving her financial problems. She indicated that she might file for bankruptcy or she 
 
7 
 
 
might apply for a debt relief program, if such a program is available. She also plans to 
use her next tax refund to pay the delinquent medical debts; however, it is unknown 
whether she will receive a refund and, if she does, its amount. Based on the evidence 
presented, I cannot find that her financial problems are under control, that they arose 
under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, or that they do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not 
apply. 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to her divorce from her second 
husband and unexpected medical expenses arising from the birth of her son. These 
were conditions beyond her control. However, some of her medical debts predate both 
of those conditions. To obtain full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), both prongs of that mitigating 
condition, i.e., conditions beyond the individual’s control and responsible conduct, must 
be established. In this case, she has not established that she has acted responsibility 
under the circumstances. She has been continually employed during her financial 
problems. She obtained the home in her latest divorce even though she was not able by 
herself to maintain it financially. She initially planned to obtain renters to assist her 
financially, but decided against doing so after the birth of her child. She depleted her 
savings on the mortgage payments. She stopped paying the mortgages in February 
2010. She and her ex-husband listed the home for sale in July 2010. Her efforts to sell 
or otherwise dispose of the home were unsuccessful. Those efforts were stymied 
because her ex-husband either was not cooperating or could not be found. After 
stopping her mortgage payments, she continued to reside in the home for a year and a 
half before vacating it. From May 2005 to August 2010, she accumulated 19 medical 
debts. She paid two of them in April 2011 and paid two after the hearing. The four paid 
medical debts total $572. She is not presently negotiating with any of the medical debt 
creditors, but plans to pay the remaining medical debts in the future. Based on the 
evidence presented, she has failed to establish a meaningful track record of payments 
on the delinquent medical debts. AG ¶ 20(d) and 20(e) apply to the four medical debts 
that she has paid. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not mitigate the security 
concerns in this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has served in her current job for over six years. Her coworkers think 
highly of her. She is described as dependable, honest, hardworking, and a person of 
integrity. Nevertheless, her financial problems are ongoing and significant. She has not 
developed a definitive plan for resolving her mortgage indebtedness. She indicated that 
she might file bankruptcy or apply for a debt relief program. She also has 15 unresolved 
delinquent medical debts, some dating back five or six years. She only recently paid 
four of them. She has not established a track record of payments on the delinquent 
medical debts. After weighing all the evidence in the context of the whole-person 
concept, I find that Applicant’s financial problems remain a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.u:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
