 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02657 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 15, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in 
his background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and 
Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated July 25, 2011, to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. These actions were taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 29, 2011. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 8, 2011, admitting all 13 allegations 
under Guideline F. He provided an explanation for his answers and his delinquent 
debts. Applicant originally requested a decision on the record. However, he requested a 
hearing on September 12, 2011. (Hearing Exhibit I) Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on September 28, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on that date. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 20, 2011, scheduling a hearing for 
November 8, 2011. Department counsel notified Applicant of the hearing date on 
September 28, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered 
five exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government 
Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5. Applicant testified on his behalf and offered one exhibit 
that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibit (App. 
Ex.) A. I left the record open for Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant did 
not submit any additional documents. (Gov. Ex. 6, e-mail, dated December 7, 2011) 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 21, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He served on active duty in the Navy from 1984 until 
1988. He graduated from college in 1993 with a bachelor’s degree in management. He 
worked with a defense contractor from 1996 until September 2011, when he was laid 
off. He started employment with another defense contractor in October 2011. (Tr. 12) 
He married in 1992 and divorced in 2005. He has one son he supports from this 
marriage. He married again in 2006 and is still married. (Tr. 12-15) 
 
Applicant’s yearly salary with his previous defense contractor employer was 
$75,000. On his personal financial statement submitted with his response to 
interrogatories, Applicant lists his monthly income as $3,868 and his wife’s at $2,400 for 
a combined monthly income of $6,268. He lists recurring monthly expenses of 
approximately $3,677, leaving a monthly net remainder of $2,500. At the hearing, 
Applicant stated his income and expenses on that statement are wrong and he was 
actually living paycheck to paycheck at the time. His net monthly remainder is actually 
about $225. (Tr. 20-21, 42-48) 
 
Applicant’s yearly salary with his new employer is approximately $68,000. His 
wife just recently returned to the work force in 2010 after being sick. Her yearly salary is 
approximately $15,000, the same amount she made before she was sick. When he left 
his initial employer in September 2011, he received a severance payment of 
approximately $13,000. He placed the funds in his savings account. He is current with 
 
3 
 
 
his federal and state taxes. In the past, he received federal tax refunds of approximately 
$5,000 each year. (Tr. 25-27, 46-49)  
  
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 4, dated July 28, 2010, and Gov. Ex. 5, dated June 8, 
2011) and Applicant's response to interrogatories (Gov. Ex. 2 and 3, dated May 27, 
2011) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a debt for a computer for 
$1,300 (SOR 1.a); a department store debt for clothing for $740 (SOR 1.b); a charged 
off credit card debt for $14,054 (SOR 1.c); two credit card debts to the SAME creditor 
for $6,956 (SOR 1.d) and $11,761 (SOR 1.e); a department store account in collection 
for $962 (SOR 1.f); two telephone service debts to the same company in collection for 
$666 (SOR 1.g), and $2,091 (SOR 1.h); a credit card debt in collection for $315 (SOR 
1.i); a mortgage debt of $103,000 (SOR 1.j); a vehicle repossession debt of $9,019 
(SOR 1.k); another vehicle debt in collection for $19,764 (SOR 1.l); and a second 
mortgage debt of $25,914 (SOR 1.m). The total amount of the unsecured debt listed on 
the SOR is approximately $35,000. The debt without the repossession is approximately 
$16,000.   
 
When Applicant married his second wife in 2006, both of them had good jobs. 
They purchased a new home and car in June 2007 based on their incomes. Applicant‘s 
wife became sick in 2007 with a spine and back medical condition that prevented her 
from working. She required extensive medical care. Some of the medical expenses 
were covered by health insurance, but other expenses were not covered and they had 
to be paid out-of-pocket. Applicant and his wife are current with the medical expense 
incurred by his wife. (Tr. 18-19, 50-51; App. Ex. A, Medical Bills, dated September 15, 
2011) 
 
Applicant’s wife’s inability to work led to a loss of income causing the couple 
financial problems. Applicant concentrated on making mortgage and car payments with 
their reduced income. He used credit cards for some household and living expenses. 
Since his wife is again working and drawing a salary, Applicant anticipates that he and 
his wife will be able to shortly stabilize their finances and pay their debts. In his interview 
with a security investigator in August 2010, and in his May 2011 response to 
interrogatories, Applicant stated his intent at the time was to start paying the debts. (Tr. 
19-22; Gov. Ex. 2 and 3, Response to Interrogatory, dated May 27, 2011) 
  
When Applicant purchased his new home in June 2007, he still owned his 
previous house which he was unable to sell. The house was new when purchased in 
1993 for $80,000. He believed the current mortgage balance was approximately 
$60,000. After his wife became sick in 2007, Applicant fell behind a few months on his 
mortgage payments for his old house which caused him to try to sell the house since he 
could not carry two mortgages. Applicant claims he received an offer of $90,000 for the 
sale of the house but the mortgage holder would not accept the sale. He claimed he 
gave the creditor a deed in lieu of sale and the creditor sold the house for over 
$100,000. He was only a few months behind on his mortgage payments at the time. He 
intended to use the profits from the sale of the house to improve his financial situation, 
but he received nothing from the sale of the house. This scenario does not make 
 
4 
 
 
financial sense. Applicant did not provide a reasonable and financially sound reason for 
him not to receive any profit from the sale of the house.  
 
SOR debt 1.a is for a laptop computer Applicant purchased for his wife in 2006. 
He has not made any payment on this debt but intends to shortly. (Tr. 29-30) SOR debt 
1.b is to a clothing store for purchases made by his wife. He has not made any 
payments on this debt. (Tr. 29-30)  
 
SOR debt 1.c is for a credit card used for living expenses that became delinquent 
in 2009. He believes the real amount of credit used was only $7,000. Applicant has not 
made any payments on this debt. (Tr. 30-32) 
 
SOR debt 1.d is for a bank issued credit card that was used for living expenses 
when Applicant’s wife was unable to work. The bank made a settlement offer of 50% of 
the debt. He has not paid the settlement offer and is trying to renegotiate it. (Tr. 32-33)  
 
SOR debt 1.e is another credit card issued by the same bank that issued the 
credit card at SOR 1.d. He is anticipating a payment plan for the debt from the creditor. 
He has not received the payment plan and has not made any payments on the debt. 
(Tr. 33-34)  
 
SOR debt 1.f is a debt in collection for a department store. Applicant’s wife 
charged purchases from the store. Applicant anticipated using the profit from the sale of 
his first house to pay this debt. Since he did not receive funds from the sale of the 
house, he has not made any payments on this debt. He now anticipates using a tax 
refund in 2012 to pay the debt. (Tr. 34-35) 
 
SOR debts 1.g and 1.h are with a telephone company. He is disputing the 
amount of the $666 bill at SOR 1.g for cell phone service. The debt at SOR 1.h is for 
terminating a cell phone contract early. Applicant’s wife is still trying to resolve the 
disputes with the telephone company. The debts have not been paid. (Tr. 35-36) 
Applicant is not sure of the creditor for the debt at SOR 1.i. He has not made any 
payments on the debt. (Tr.36-37) 
 
SOR debt 1.j is for the first mortgage on Applicant’s new house he purchased in 
2007. SOR debt 1.m is for the second mortgage on the house. He requested and 
received a mortgage modification for both mortgages. He paid a lump sum of $4,100 to 
bring the mortgage current. His payments on the first and second mortgage are now 
current. He received a mortgage modification for his new house in June 2011. He made 
a lump sum payment of $4,100 from tax refunds, and the first and second mortgages on 
this house are current. (Tr. 37, 41) 
 
SOR debt 1.k is for Applicant’s wife’s car. The car was purchased new in 2007 
for approximately $19,000. The car loan was paid until the summer of 2011 when 
Applicant and his wife were unable to continue to make payments. Applicant fell a 
number of months behind on the car payments and voluntarily returned the car to the 
 
5 
 
 
dealer. He has not been notified of any sale of the vehicle. He believes the debt of 
$9,000 for the vehicle in the SOR is accurate. SOR debt 1.l is for Applicant’s truck. He is 
current with his payments on this loan. (Tr. 37-41)  
 
 Applicant did not present a clear picture of the status of his finances. He attached 
documents, including a personal financial statement and pay records from his previous 
employer, to his response to interrogatories. His yearly salary of $75,000 is confirmed 
by the pay records. In the personal financial statement, he lists his net monthly pay as 
$3,868. This is consistent with his $75,000 yearly salary. He lists his wife net monthly 
pay as $2,400. Their combined monthly income was $6,268. Applicant listed his 
recurring monthly expenses of approximately $3,592, leaving approximately $2,500 in a 
net remainder. At the hearing, he stated this information was inaccurate, that his net 
remainder was only about $225, and that he lived paycheck to paycheck. The 
information in the personal financial statement was provided directly by Applicant. (Tr. 
21-28) 
 
Applicant showed a lack of knowledge or understanding of his finances. He did 
not pursue the lender to see if he was due anything from the sale of the house. His 
statements concerning his finances were inconsistent and illogical.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
6 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts established by credit reports and Applicant’s 
admissions raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The evidence indicates both an inability and an unwillingness to satisfy 
debt. Applicant incurred financial problems when his wife was unable to work from 2007 
until 2010 because of illness, and he used credit cards to pay living expenses. He was 
unable to pay all of his debts as agreed.  
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
 
7 
 
 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
These mitigating conditions have some application to Applicant’s financial situation. 
Applicant incurred delinquent debt when his wife became ill in 2007 and was unable to 
work. She returned to work in 2010 and now contributes as much to the family finances 
as she did before she became ill. When his wife was out of work, Applicant was able to 
stay current with his wife’s medical bills but feel behind on his mortgage, car payments, 
and credit card debts. His wife’s illness and inability to work were unusual 
circumstances or conditions that were beyond his control. But Applicant did not act 
reasonably and responsibly towards his finances under the circumstances. He was 
unable to show a clear understanding of the status of his finances. He provided 
conflicting information concerning the funds available to pay his debts. While current 
with his mortgage and his own car payments, he has not paid any of his credit card, 
store, telephone, or repossession debts. He has not established that he acted 
responsibly towards his debts under the circumstances. 
  
 I considered AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must 
be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith 
effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts 
is needed. Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual 
debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he paid each and every debt listed. All that is required is that 
Applicant demonstrates an established plan to resolve his financial problems and show 
he has taken significant actions to implement that plan. 
 
Applicant restructured his mortgage and is current with the first and second 
mortgage on his house. He is current with his wife’s medical bills and his own car 
payment. However, he has taken no action to repay his credit cards, telephone bills, 
department store debts, or wife’s car repossession debt. His failure to address these 
debts is significant and credible information showing a lack of a systematic plan to pay 
debts and the lack of a meaningful track record of debt payment. A promise to pay 
debts in the future does not show a reasonable and prudent adherence to financial 
obligations leading to a good-faith effort to pay debts. His failure to take action shows 
his approach to his finances is unreasonable, lacks honesty, and does not indicate 
prudence and an adherence to his financial duties and obligations. He has not 
established a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and resolve debt. His past 
delinquent debts continue to reflect adversely on his trustworthiness, honesty, and good 
judgment.   
 
I also considered AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue). Applicant is disputing the amount of the debts at SOR 1.g, 
 
8 
 
 
and SOR 1.h. He has not articulated a good basis for the dispute. Applicant has not 
mitigated security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s four years 
of active duty Navy service. I considered Applicant’s long service with his defense 
contractor employer. I also considered that some of Applicant’s financial problems were 
caused by his wife’s inability to work when ill. He was able to modify his mortgage and 
is current with the mortgage payments, his wife’s medical bills, and a car payment. 
However, he has credit card bills, department store debts, telephone bills, and a car 
repossession that he has not even started to pay. A year ago, he was to start payment 
arrangements on these debts, but he has not made any payments to date. Applicant did 
not establish a "meaningful track record" of resolution or payment of his delinquent 
debts. His lack of action to pay most of his past financial obligations and resolve his 
debts indicates he will not be concerned, responsible, and careful regarding classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from financial 
considerations. He is denied access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.l – 1.m:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
