 
1 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:        ) 
                                 ) 
 )       ISCR Case No. 11-02652 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
     
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:  
Based upon a review of the pleadings, items, and legal arguments in the case 
file, Applicant mitigates foreign influence security concerns but does not mitigate foreign 
preference security concerns. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of Case 
 
On July 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 13, 2011, and elected to have his 
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on October 6, 2011. Applicant did not submit any information in 
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 22, 2011.  
 
 
2 
 
Besides its seven items, the Government requested administrative notice of one 
document: Country Specific Information, Brazil, U.S. Department of State (November 
10, 2010). Applicant did not ask to include any items addressing Brazil's country status.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007); 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007). Administrative notice is appropriate 
for noticing facts or government reports that are well known. See Stein, Administrative 
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown, administrative notice 
was granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the 
geopolitical status of Brazil.  
 
Summary of Pleadings 
 
Under Guideline C, Applicant is alleged to have exercised dual citizenship with 
Brazil after becoming a U.S. citizen in January 2007 by (i) applying for, obtaining, and 
holding a Brazilian passport issued in January 2009 and not subject to expiration before 
January 2014 and (b) using his Brazilian passport, instead of his U.S. passport, for 
travel in at least December 2009.  
 
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged (a) to have a mother, brother, and sister 
who are citizens and residents of Brazil and (b) to have a daughter who is a dual 
citizen of Brazil and the U.S.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations under 
Guidelines C and B. He claimed his holding a Brazilian passport was required by 
Brazilian authorities to enter and depart Brazil and claims no member of his family has 
any knowledge of his security clearance application, understanding of the significance 
of a security clearance, or the products his company makes. And he claims to have 
disclosed his daughter's dual citizenship and her use of a Brazilian passport for traveling 
convenience.  
 
                          Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old supply chain manager for a defense contractor who 
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by 
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.  
 
Applicant's background  
 
Applicant was born and raised in Brazil to parents of Brazilian citizenship and 
residency. By virtue of his birth to Brazilian parents, Applicant was awarded Brazilian 
citizenship himself. He attended Brazilian primary and secondary schools. Applicant 
immigrated to the U.S. from Brazil sometime in 2003 (specific date of entry not 
provided).  Applicant married his spouse (a U.S. citizen by birth) in May 2003 and has 
one child (age three) from this marriage. (Item 4).  By virtue of his dual citizenship with 
Brazil, his daughter is a dual citizen of Brazil and the U.S. as well. (Items 3 and 4)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant applied for U.S. citizenship and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
January 2007. (Item 4) He obtained a U.S. passport in February 2007. (Items 4 and 6) 
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, he retained his Brazilian citizenship, 
because Brazil requires "anyone born in Brazil to travel in and out of Brazil with a 
Brazilian passport only." (Item 7) U.S. passports, in turn, are not accepted from 
Brazilian natives. (Item 7)  Applicant has never renounced his Brazilian citizenship and 
never destroyed or turned in his Brazilian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
Applicant applied for an updated Brazilian passport and received a newly issued 
Brazilian passport in January 2009. (Item 6) This passport will not expire until January 
2014. (Item 6) Because he has family (mother, brother, and sister) still residing in 
Brazil, he is reluctant to destroy or relinquish his Brazilian passport.  
 
Because of Brazilian legal requirements, Applicant can enter and exit Brazil for 
family emergencies only with his Brazilian passport. (Items 5 and 7) And in the event 
his Brazilian passport was destroyed or surrendered, he would be required to obtain a 
new one, a long and expensive process. So, consequently, Applicant is disinclined to 
destroy or surrender his Brazilian passport, or renounce his Brazilian citizenship. (Item 
6)  
 
Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2007, Applicant has traveled on a couple of 
occasions to destinations outside the U.S., using his Brazilian passport exclusively to 
depart and re-enter the U.S. (Items 6 and 7) For instance, he used his Brazilian 
passport to travel to Brazil in December 2009 to visit his family, returning in January 
2010. (Item 6) He is currently unwilling to destroy or surrender his Brazilian passport to 
his facility clearance officer (FSO) because of Brazilian requirements to obtain a new 
Brazilian passport for any future trip to Brazil to see his family. (Item 6) For the same 
reasons, Applicant is unwilling to consider renouncing his Brazilian citizenship. 
Applicant remains a dual citizen of the U.S. and Brazil. (Items 4, 6, and 7)  
 
Applicant has never voted in a Brazilian election. While eligible, he never 
served in the Brazilian military, and is currently not subject to conscription. (Item 7) He 
has no business, financial, or property interests in Brazil, and considers the U.S. his 
principal place of residence and the country of his predominant loyalty. (Item 7) His 
three-year-old daughter has both a U.S. passport and Brazilian passport, which she 
uses to travel to and from Brazil. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant's family ties in Brazil  
 
Applicant's mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of Brazil. (Item 
4) His mother was born in Brazil and is a retired seamstress. (Item 7) Applicant 
maintains weekly telephone contact with her and sees her once a year. (Item 7) She is 
not familiar with Applicant's work or aware of his application for a security clearance.  
 
Besides his mother, Applicant has two siblings who are citizens and residents of 
Brazil. Both were born and raised in Brazil. (ltem 7) Applicant communicates by 
telephone with his brother once or twice a year and sees him once a year when he 
 
4 
 
visits Brazil. (Item 7) His brother is a mechanical technician for a private German steel 
company operating in Brazil. His brother has no known affiliations or sympathies with 
any foreign governments or interests in them. (Item 7)  
Applicant also has a sister who is both a citizen and resident of Brazil. (Item7) 
He maintains telephonic contact with her weekly and sees her every two years when 
he visits Brazil. (Item 7) His sister is a housewife with no affiliation with any foreign 
governments. The administrative record does not provide any documentation of 
whether or not the parents and siblings have ever worked or associated with officials of 
the Brazilian government and military. 
 
Brazil's country status 
 
Brazil is a federation of states with an advanced developing economy. (Item 8) 
Brazil remains a non-hostile trading partner of the U.S. and is a country whose 
democratic institutions are not incompatible with our own traditions and respect for 
human rights and the rule of law. Brazil maintains strong bilateral trading and 
commercial relations with the U.S. and is a charter member of the Organization of 
American States. See Country Specific Information, Brazil, supra. (Item 8) Brazil is a 
country with no known recent history of government-sponsored hostage taking or 
disposition for exerting undue influence against family members to obtain either 
classified information, or unclassified economic and proprietary data. (id.)  
 
Policies 
 
The Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by 
administrative judges in the decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These 
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying" (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and 
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security 
clearance should be granted, continued or denied. The Guidelines do not require the 
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision. In 
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into 
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth 
in E2 (a) of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended 
to assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense 
decision.  
 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication 
policy concerns are pertinent herein:  
 
Foreign Preference  
 
The Concern: "When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference 
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide 
 
5 
 
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States." 
See Adjudicative Guideline (AG) C, § 9.  
 
Foreign Influence  
 
The Concern: "Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism." See AG B, § 6. 
 
Burden of Proof 
 
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue 
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding 
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive 
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence 
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a 
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that 
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences 
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the 
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.  
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted 
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts 
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a 
security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require 
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled 
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. 
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or 
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or 
mitigation of the Government's case.   
 
Analysis 
 
Applicant, who is employed by a U.S. defense contractor, was born and raised in 
Brazil. He immigrated to the U.S. in 2003 and became a naturalized citizen in January 
2007. Claiming the need for a Brazilian passport to enable him to legally enter and exit  
 
6 
 
Brazil, he retained and renewed his Brazilian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and 
obtaining a U.S. passport.  
 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail country allegiance assessments and 
invite critical considerations over acts indicating a preference for the interests of the 
foreign country over the interests of the U.S. In a different vein, the continued residence 
of his immediate family members (his parents, brother, and sister) in Brazil raise 
potential concerns about their being vulnerable to future pressure or duress that could 
result in the compromise of classified information. To some consent, too, Applicant’s  
young daughter’s dual citizenship with Brazil, and the chances of her accompanying 
Applicant on his trips to Brazil, raise potential concerns. The issues, as such, raise 
security concerns over Applicant's preference for a foreign country over the U.S., and 
the potential for members of Applicant's immediate family being placed at risk to 
pressure Applicant to divulge classified information he might be privy to.  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
By virtue of his birth in Brazil to parents of Brazilian descent and citizenship, 
Applicant was endowed with Brazilian citizenship. This citizenship could not be lost 
except by express renunciation, approved by the Brazilian government which Applicant 
has never explored. He renewed his Brazilian passport in 2009 and has never 
expressed any willingness to surrender it.  He still retains his Brazilian passport for use 
in entering and exiting Brazil to see his family and has provided no documentation of his 
surrendering the passport to his FSO, or other; authorized official. Risks of his being 
taken hostage behind Brazilian lines and denied the customary diplomatic intercession 
made available to U.S. citizens traveling on U.S. passports remains for so long as 
Applicant retains his Brazilian passport.   
The Appeal Board has tended to blur convenience/force of law distinctions when 
appraising claimed legal necessity reasons (concerns about dealing with Brazilian 
officials in Applicant's case) for holding onto a foreign passport. See ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. February 8, 2001); ISCR Case No. 99-0254 (App. Bd. February 16, 
2000). To be sure, Applicant’s exercise of choice to renew and retain his Brazilian 
passport for use when traveling to Brazil after becoming a U.S. citizen is itself a 
voluntary election. He made his election to continue holding his Brazilian passport and 
citizenship with presumptive knowledge that his traveling to Brazil on the strength of a 
Brazilian passport jeopardized the ability of U.S. security personnel to monitor and track 
his movements and provide diplomatic assistance should it become necessary to 
protect him and secrets he might be privy to.   
 
While Applicant‘s desire to have continued personal access to his family 
members in Brazil by the only legal means currently available to him under Brazilian law 
is understandable, his personal interests cannot take precedence over the 
Government’s security interests.  Considered in this light, Applicant’s election to retain 
his Brazilian passport and citizenship in compliance with Brazilian ingress and egress 
requirements may not be recognized as an exception to Guideline C’s published 
preference criteria. By this line of Appeal Board reasoning, Applicant’s application for 
 
7 
 
renewal of a Brazilian passport reflected a conscious preference for Brazil, even if his 
reissuance application was for perfectly logical and understandable reasons.   
 
So, even Applicant's claimed exercise of dual citizenship under compulsion of 
law is sufficient under the facts of this case to invoke one disqualifying condition of the 
Guidelines covering foreign preference: DC 10(a), "exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member,” which includes possession of a current foreign 
passport. Concerns over Applicant's foreign preference for Brazil through his continued 
possession of his Brazilian passport and dual U.S.-Brazilian citizenship remain 
considerable.  
 Applicant, to be sure, has no assets in Brazil and assures his preference is for 
the U.S. He has never voted in a Brazilian election, served in Brazil’s military, or worked 
for the Brazilian government. By contrast, all of his assets and financial interests are 
located in the U.S. And his dual citizenship with Brazil is based solely on his parents’ 
Brazilian citizenship and his birth in that country. Still, he retains his Brazilian passport 
and citizenship and has expressed no willingness to abandon either one. For these 
reasons, none of the available mitigating conditions covered by Guideline C apply.   
 
 Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s exercise of dual 
citizenship and lack of any documented surrender of his Brazilian passport or clear 
expression of an intent to renounce his Brazilian citizenship, conclusions warrant that 
foreign preference concerns are not mitigated. Unfavorable conclusions are entered 
with respect to subparagraph 1.a of Guideline C of the AGs. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Principal security issues raised under Guideline B center on Applicant's mother 
and siblings who are citizens and residents of Brazil and his daughter who retains dual 
citizenship with Brazil and the U.S. Security concerns are raised over risks that both 
Applicant's immediate family members residing in Brazil, and his daughter who has dual 
citizenship with Brazil and the U.S., might be subject to undue foreign influence by 
Brazilian government and military authorities to access classified information in 
Applicant's possession or control.  
Because Applicant's family members either are citizen/residents of Brazil, or 
have dual citizenship and the potential to travel to Brazil (as is the case with Applicant’s  
young daughter), they present potential heightened security risks covered by 
disqualifying condition (DC) § 7(a), "contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a the Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 704, 
Personnel Security Standards and Procedures Eligibility, dated, October 1, 2008; the 
Intelligence Community Policy Guidance (ICPG) 704.2, heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion," of Guideline B. The 
citizenship/residence status of these family members in Brazil, and to some extent 
Applicant’s young daughter who resides in the U.S., pose some potential concerns for 
 
8 
 
Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise 
sensitive or classified information under Applicant's possession and/or control.  
Historically, the Appeal Board has been clear and consistent in its holdings that 
the nature of the foreign government, the intelligence gathering history of that 
government, and the presence of terrorist activity in the country are material to a foreign 
influence case. See ISCR Case No. 07-07266 (App. Bd. Dec. June 27, 2008); ISCR 
Case no. 0226130 (App. Bd. Dec. Dec. 7, 2006). So, clearly, the geopolitical aims and 
policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. Brazil (the country under 
scrutiny in this case) has both a respectable human rights record and strong bilateral 
commercial relations with the U.S.  
Because of Brazil's acceptable human rights record and strong bilateral relations 
with the U.S., any potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or undue foreign 
influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or economic or 
proprietary data out of Applicant through his family members residing in Brazil or young 
daughter should she travel to Brazil, is quite remote. Applicant, accordingly, may take 
advantage of one important mitigating condition: MC § 8(a), "the nature of the 
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or 
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S." Whatever potential conflicts he may have through his continued exercise of 
Brazilian citizenship and contacts with his family members in Brazil have been more 
than counterbalanced by his demonstrated U.S. citizenship responsibilities.  
 
Due to the infrequency of the contacts Applicant has historically had with most of 
his family members (his mother excepted), potential risks associated with them are 
tempered. Moreover, none of Applicant's family members have any identified affiliations 
or contacts with Brazilian government or military officials known to be associated with 
intelligence or military organizations interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive 
information in the U.S. Nor does Applicant or his young daughter have any known 
contacts with Brazilian government or military officials that could be exploited or 
subjected to pressure. 
 
Further, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of Applicant's 
family members in Brazil have any known (a) political affiliations with Brazil's 
government, (b) history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or (c)  
major indications of any vulnerability to the same. His mother is a retired seamstress; 
his brother is a mechanical technician; and his sister is a housewife. None appear to 
have any financial or business interests that could be at risk to exploitation or pressure.  
 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate 
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign 
countries. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country may not 
be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be weighed on 
a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the supplied materials 
 
9 
 
and country information about Brazil. Unlike the old AGs, the new ones explicitly take 
into account the country's demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important 
consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency 
elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the 
particular foreign regime involved do matter. Brazil remains a friendly country of the 
U.S. with strong bilateral trade and commercial relations, an acceptable human rights 
record, and historical respect for the rule of law.  
MC § 11 (8(b), "there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest," has application, too, to Applicant's situation. Applicant is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen with no known financial interests in Brazil that could pose potential conflicts 
for him and his family members residing in Brazil.  Whatever potential conflicts he may 
have through his family members who reside in Brazil are more than outweighed by 
Applicant's demonstrated U.S. citizenship responsibilities.  
Whole-person assessment also serves to minimize Applicant's exposure to 
conflict of interests with his Brazilian family members. Not only is Applicant a naturalized 
U.S. citizen with demonstrated loyalty and professional commitments to the U.S., but he 
has shown no inclination to expose himself to coercion or pressure. Any foreign 
influence risks associated with his family members (viz., his immediate members who 
reside in Brazil and his daughter who resides in the U.S.) are clearly manageable ones. 
In Applicant's case, any likelihood of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to 
bear on any of his family members by Brazilian authorities is minimal.  
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's immediate 
family members residing in Brazil are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive 
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to 
his familial relationships in Brazil. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the 
allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline B. 
 
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a 
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2 (a) of the 
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact, 
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate 
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subpara: 1.a     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
 
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparas. 2.a and 2.b:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Conclusions 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security 
clearance. Clearance is denied.  
 
 
    __________________ 
Roger C. Wesley 
Administrative Judge 
