 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03655 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption, Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 6, 2011, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On October 25, 2011, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant on October 31, 2011, and it was received on November 18, 2011. Applicant 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide additional information. The case 
was assigned to me on January 9, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 22 years old. He is a high school graduate. He is not married and 
has no children. He has worked for a federal contractor since January 2008. 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was 16 years old. His level of 
consumption increased over time until he was consuming alcohol daily. He would drink 
3-5 cans of beer a night and 6 to 9 on Friday and Saturday nights. He would also 
consume whiskey and mixed drinks on the weekend, in varied amounts.1
 
  
 On August 2007, Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of 
alcohol. His charge was reduced to reckless endangerment. He was fined and placed 
on two year’s probation, and required to attend a DUI impact panel. 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant was issued a citation for minor in possession of alcohol. 
In May 2010, Applicant was charged with DUI. After consuming alcohol, he lost control 
of his car, drove off the road, and struck a fence. His blood alcohol was .139%. He 
received a deferred prosecution. He was ordered to attend two years of intensive 
outpatient treatment, attend Alcohol Anonymous meetings, and have an interlock device 
installed on his vehicle. Applicant received alcohol treatment from about August 10, 
2010, until at least the date he received the SOR. At his treatment he was diagnosed as 
alcohol dependent. He has been complying with the alcohol treatment. From the age of 
16 until his court-ordered treatment, Applicant consumed alcohol, progressing to 
consumption on a daily basis, and sometimes in excess to the point of intoxication. 
Applicant is addressing his alcohol problem through the court-ordered program. He has 
not yet completed the two-year program.2
 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from approximately age 15, until about six weeks 
before he received the court-ordered alcohol evaluation in August 2010. On his security 
clearance application (SCA) signed April 3, 2009, he disclosed he used marijuana from 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
 
2 Item 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10. 
 
 
3 
 
 
about March 2006 to about August 2007. He indicated he smoked marijuana about 12 
times during this period of time.3 During his investigative interview in January 2011, he 
told the investigator that he used marijuana six to seven times a year from his first use, 
at age 15 until about six weeks prior to his alcohol evaluation in August 2010. He 
indicated he used it mostly with friends on the weekend. He also admitted to the 
investigator that he purchased marijuana about 20 times from a friend, paying about 
$60 to $80 for a small quantity each time. At the time of investigative interview, he still 
associated with the friend he purchased marijuana from. In Applicant’s answer to the 
SOR in August 2011, he indicated after he graduated from high school his marijuana 
use had progressed to almost daily use until August 2010.4
 
 
 On Applicant’s SCA, in response to Question 23 which required disclosure of his 
past drug use, Applicant stated he used marijuana 12 times from March 2006 through 
August 2007. Applicant intentionally and deliberately provided false information on his 
SCA. In fact he was using marijuana daily even after he applied for a security clearance 
and after his investigative interview. During the interview, he stated he used marijuana 
about six or seven times a year until about six weeks before he started his alcohol 
treatment. This contradicts his answer to the SOR. He indicated during his interview that 
he did not believe he was addicted to marijuana. He also stated he stopped using 
marijuana because he had to submit to drug and alcohol testing as part of his 
treatment.5
 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol counselor provided a statement indicating Applicant has been 
in intensive outpatient treatment since August 30, 2010. He has attended the mandated 
group sessions and has completed phase I and II of treatment. He is in the third phase 
and is compliant. He has completed two of the required eight sessions. He then has a 
final phase of treatment, that is once a month for a year. He is also attending a 
minimum of two 12-step meetings weekly. The counselor indicated Applicant is making 
excellent progress.6
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 Item 5. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 Item 9. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
5 
 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and the 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; and 
 
Applicant was arrested twice for DUI. His earlier charge was reduced to reckless 
endangerment. Applicant is under a deferred prosecution program for his last DUI. He 
was diagnosed as alcohol dependent, but there is insufficient evidence to determine the 
qualifications of the person who made the diagnosis, so I cannot apply AG ¶ 22(d). 
Applicant also received a citation for minor in possession of alcohol. He admitted he 
consumed alcohol daily until he began the court-mandated treatment program. I find AG 
¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt o the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant has a long history of alcohol dependence. He is still undergoing court-
mandated alcohol treatment as part of his deferred prosecution. It appears he has 
abstained from alcohol use since beginning the program. He has not yet completed the 
program, nor shown an aftercare period of abstinence without court mandated 
supervision. He is actively participating in treatment, but insufficient evidence was 
presented to indicate he acknowledges his alcohol dependence. He has not yet 
established a pattern of abstinence when he is not subject to the scrutiny of the 
treatment program. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
Applicant first used marijuana when he was 15 years old. He used it throughout 
high school and progressed to using it daily until he began his alcohol treatment 
program. He used it after he applied for a security clearance and after his investigative 
interview. I find AG ¶ 25(a) applies.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following 
three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a)the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
 
7 
 
 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant was a habitual marijuana user. When he started his court-mandated 
alcohol treatment he received drug and alcohol tests. He stopped using marijuana 
before that time. Applicant’s use was sufficiently recent and frequent that I cannot 
conclude it is unlikely to recur. The fact he continued to use it after he applied for a 
security clearance and after his investigative interview casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant has not had an appropriate period of 
abstinence from drug use. He continues to associate with a person with whom he 
purchased drugs. Insufficient evidence was provided to apply AG ¶26 (b). There is 
evidence Applicant is in an alcohol treatment program. I do not have sufficient evidence 
to conclude that his drug issues are also being addressed. In any event, he has not 
completed the program. Therefore, AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and conclude the following have been raised: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his SCA the full extent of his marijuana 
use. After he completed the SCA, he later admitted in his answer that he was using 
marijuana daily. He stated on his SCA that he used it twelve times from March 2006 to 
August 2007. This contradicts other admissions he made about his drug use. I find 
Applicant deliberately and intentionally falsified his SCA, and the above disqualifying 
condition applies.  
 
8 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 Applicant was aware of the frequency of his past drug use and his responsibility 
to disclose it when he completed his SCA. He did not promptly correct his falsification. 
Rather, he continued to change his answer and provide false information. His 
falsifications are not minor. His actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and 
good judgment. Finally, on his answer to the SOR, he seemed to acknowledge the 
extent of his past drug use. Although this is a positive step, there is insufficient evidence 
to find any of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G, H, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has been drinking alcohol and using marijuana since he was a teenager. He 
was arrested twice for DUI. The first charge was reduced and the second charge is held 
in abeyance under a deferred prosecution program. He is mandated by the court to 
attend an intensive two-year alcohol treatment program. He has completed a part of it, 
but must continue to comply with it before his case is dismissed. Applicant has been 
compliant and appears to be doing well. However, until he successfully completes the 
program and has an extended period of abstinence from drugs and alcohol, it is too 
early to conclude that these issues are no longer a security concern. Applicant’s 
falsifications also remain a security concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:    Against Applicant  
  
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
