 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-00014 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 11, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 16, 2011, and DOHA received his 
answer on June 17, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 4, 
2011. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on August 12, 2011, scheduling the hearing for August 30, 2011. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
Tabs A through L, which was received into evidence without objection, and he testified 
on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until September 16, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted 
Tab M (1) through (6), which was received into evidence without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011. The record closed on 
September 16, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1a, 1b, and 1g. He denied the remaining 
allegations. Applicant provided explanations for his admissions and denials. His 
answers with explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. I found Applicant’s 
testimony to be credible. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 69-year-old part-time contract investigator, who has been 
employed as a defense contractor conducting background investigations since about 
April 2006. He seeks to reinstate his secret security clearance, which is a condition of 
his continued employment. Applicant has had a successful history of intermittently 
holding a security clearance beginning with his military service in 1960 until the 
present. (Tr. 13-17, GE 1.) 
 
After graduating from high school, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy and 
served on active duty from July 1960 to July 1964. He was honorably discharged as a 
Radarman Second Class (pay grade E-5). Applicant then attended a prestigious state 
university from December 1965 to June 1969, and was awarded a Bachelor of Arts 
degree in law enforcement administration. He also attended one year of law school as 
an evening student after graduating from college. (Tr. 16-18, 21-23, GE 1.) 
 
Applicant has had a very diverse and impressive career in law enforcement, 
and corporate and private security. He served as a police chief for a small Midwestern 
town; director of investigations for Midwestern prosecutor’s office; was a Secret 
Service Agent and was detail agent for Presidents Nixon, Ford, and Carter, as well as 
detail and advance agent for many foreign heads of state for travel within the United 
States; served as national director of security for a Fortune 500 company with a 
portfolio of nearly 700 properties in 35 major metropolitan areas; and was a major 
property owner and manager with a direct assignment in two very high profile 
 
3 
 
 
buildings in a major metropolitan West Coast city. Applicant has also owned and 
managed two private security companies that provided armed and unarmed security 
officers for high profile buildings and events. As a consultant, Applicant also evaluated 
traditional and event security force operational preparedness for both emergency 
response activities. (Tr. 18, 23-30, AE A, Tab L.)   
 
Applicant was married and divorced three times. He has no dependents from 
his first two marriages. His most recent marriage was from March 1994 to March 
2003. Applicant and his third wife share joint custody of their two teenage sons, ages 
17 and 14. Applicant and his wife live two blocks apart and have a “good relationship,” 
particularly as it relates to their children. (Tr. 18-21, 24-25.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his June 2010 e-QIP, his April 2011 DOHA Interrogatories; as 
well as his April 2004 and June 2010 credit reports. (GE 1 – 5.) Applicant’s SOR 
alleged seven separate debts consisting of two tax liens in favor of the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) and five consumer debts. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1g.) Those seven 
debts and their current status are discussed below. 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties primarily began when he was laid off in March 
2004 from a $120,000 a year job as national security director for a Fortune 500 
company. He was able to get a job as a sales engineer in September 2004 and was 
laid off in March 2009. Since then, Applicant has found meeting his day-to-day 
expenses challenging while meeting the financial needs of his two teenage boys in a 
depressed economy. To further add to his troubles, he was diagnosed with tongue 
cancer and has been in remission since mid-2011. However, the radiation and 
chemotherapy treatment have taken their toll on him and have affected his energy 
level. He acknowledges at age 69 “the prospects of getting a real job are slim.” (GE 1, 
GE 2.)  
 
The largest debts alleged are two IRS liens, the first lien was filed in May 2006 
in the amount of $14,031, and the second lien was filed in November 1992 in the 
amount of $61,253. (SOR ¶¶ 1a and 1b.) 
 
The $14,031 lien is for tax year 2003 and arose when Applicant’s former 
employer failed to take the proper deductions from his pay. By the time Applicant 
discovered the error, the amount had become unmanageable for him to pay in a lump 
sum. Applicant immediately contacted the IRS to arrange a payment plan and has 
been making payments at the rate of $206 per month by direct debit. As recently as 
September 9, 2011, Applicant contacted the IRS and requested that they release their 
lien in light of his excellent repayment history. The IRS provided Applicant with IRS 
Form 12277 – Application for Withdrawal of Filed Form 688(Y), Notice of Federal Tax 
Lien. Applicant filed Form 12777 requesting that the 2006 IRS lien be released. 
Results are pending. (Tr. 31-37, GE 2, AE 1 (TAB A), AE 1 (TAB M (3).) 
 
4 
 
 
The $61,253 lien arose from failure to pay about $35,000 in payroll taxes in 
1985 following a cash flow problem. At that time Applicant owned a security guard 
company with about 400 employees. That amount increased to $61,243 as a result of 
penalties and interest. Applicant subsequently sold the company. The new owner 
agreed to pay Applicant consulting fees as well as the tax arrearage to the IRS. The 
new owner initially failed to comply with either of those terms and Applicant did not 
have the funds to retain counsel to sue the new owner. When the new owner failed to 
pay the tax arrearages, Applicant contacted the IRS to set up a payment plan. 
Applicant was later notified that the new owner was paying the IRS consulting fees 
owed to Applicant as a result of a levy. The proceeds from the levy were applied to the 
tax arrearage and Applicant provided documentation of same. Applicant continued 
making payments to the IRS until his meeting with the IRS on May 8, 2000. At that 
meeting, Applicant was informed by the IRS representative that he was no longer 
liable for the lien and the IRS ceased further collection activity. During Applicant’s 
2005 security clearance background investigation, this matter was reviewed and 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
At the same meeting Applicant had with the IRS on September 9, 2011, 
discussed above, he raised the issue of the 1992 lien that appeared on his credit 
report. He was referred to the IRS Lien Processing Center. Applicant then contacted 
the Lien Processing Center and was informed that the 1992 lien was no longer being 
pursued by the IRS and that the lien was “self-releasing.” The IRS further informed 
him that they had no control over how long their liens remained on individual credit 
reports. Applicant has a pending request with the credit bureaus to remove this lien 
from his credit reports. He provided ample documentation that he remained in 
communication with the IRS throughout the years regarding this lien. (Tr. 37-54, GE 2, 
AE 1 (TAB B), AE 1 (TAB M (3) and (6).) 
 
The SOR alleges two large consumer credit card debts in the amounts of 
$10,674 (SOR ¶ 1c) and $7,939 (SOR ¶ 1g). The original amounts were $3,932 and 
$4,870, respectively; however, due to penalties and interest the amounts increased to 
their current level. These debts arose in the 2005 timeframe when Applicant was laid 
off and had no income to repay them. Given his current situation, discussed below, he 
is not in a position to repay these debts in full. He has, however, provided 
documentation that he has attempted to resolve these debts throughout the years and 
as recently September 2011, he contacted a debt relief agency to explore settlement 
and repayment. Most notably, after Applicant questioned the validity of the $10,674 
debt, the creditor advised him by letter that his account was closed and they had 
notified the credit bureaus to delete their listing. Applicant provided documentation of 
his past and recent good-faith efforts to resolve these debts. (Tr. 54-61, GE 2, AE 1 
(TABs C and G), AE 1 (TAB M (3) and (5).) 
 
The remaining debts alleged in the SOR are relatively small amounts -- $119, 
$95, and $119 (SOR ¶¶ 1d – 1f). Applicant provided documentation that he has paid 
all of these debts in full. (Tr. 61-64, GE 2, (TABs D, E, and F). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s salary is primarily derived from social security and whatever he is 
able to earn conducting background investigations for his defense contractor. His 
ability to work last two years has been hindered by his cancer treatments. Applicant’s 
personal financial statement (PFS) reflects a net monthly remainder of $1,035. It is 
clear from his budget that he lives a modest lifestyle, lives within his means, and 
remains current on his daily expenses. He is actively involved in the lives of his two 
teenage sons and does his level best to provide for them with his limited means. (Tr. 
64-71, GE 2, AE 1 (TAB H). In conclusion, of the seven debts alleged, Applicant has 
resolved his two largest debts with the IRS, the creditor to whom he allegedly owed 
$10,674 has closed the account and requested the credit bureaus to delete this 
account from Applicant’s credit report, he is attempting to repay the creditor to whom 
he owes $7,939, and has paid in full the remaining three creditors. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted eight reference letters. Given the path Applicant’s life has 
taken to include Navy sailor, college student, Secret Service Agent, private sector 
businessman specializing in security, and most recently as a contract background 
investigator, the authors of these letters cover all phases of his diverse background. 
 
His references primarily are from individuals who first met Applicant on a 
professional basis, which later developed into a long-term friendship. His references 
date back to a childhood friend and a former Navy shipmate and carry through to the 
present. The collective sense of these reference letters paint a compelling picture of a 
decent, hard working, intelligent, honest, and patriotic individual who places his 
teenage sons as his first priority. It speaks very well of Applicant that he was able to 
develop and maintain friendships with so many people for so many years. All of his 
references strongly support Applicant for a security clearance. (Tr. 71-72, AE 1 (TAB 
J).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1a to 1g, he had seven delinquent debts 
 
7 
 
 
that have been in various states of delinquency over the years. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant merits full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because he was laid off two times 
from high paying jobs in the latter part of his working life. These were events beyond 
his control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Even though he did not 
have the funds for full repayment for all of his debts, he consistently remained in 
contact with his creditors and has taken reasonable steps to resolve his debts.1
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
  
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant did seek financial counseling 
through a debt relief agency and there are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved. He has produced evidence that he is living within his means and 
has regained financial responsibility. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to 
establish partial if not full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2
 
 Applicant has paid, is paying, 
or has otherwise resolved six out of the seven debts alleged, and is attempting to 
settle with his remaining creditor. Given the funds available to him, his plan is 
reasonable and prudent. AG ¶ 20(e) is partially applicable given the fact that Applicant 
has challenged the amounts owed and current status of several of his debts. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s record of military service, service as a Secret service Special Agent, 
and superb employment weighs in his favor. There is no evidence of any security 
violation during the time Applicant may have held a security clearance. He is a law-
abiding citizen. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and 
his SOR debts have been and are being addressed in a meaningful and thoughtful 
manner. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant established a meaningful plan for resolving his debts. He is making a 
significant contribution to the national defense. His eight references fully support him 
and recommend him for a security clearance. Due to circumstances beyond his 
control, his debts became delinquent. Based on his background and demonstrated 
record of trustworthiness, there is sufficient reason to believe that Applicant will 
overcome this setback. For the overwhelming majority of his adult life, he has 
established a history of financial responsibility. Apart from the SOR debts alleged, he 
has been current on all of his other debts and lives within his means. These factors 
show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s military service in 
the Navy, his tenure with the Secret Service where his assignments included the 
protection of three U.S. Presidents, his years of financial responsibility before falling 
 
10 
 
 
into debt, his plan for financial recovery and substantial steps he has taken to resolve 
his financial situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his age 
and maturity, his dedication and unwavering support of his two teenage boys, his 
overall contribution to society, and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the G overnment’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a to 1g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
