 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 11-04413    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
was granted asylum in 1982 after escaping his native Vietnam. His mother, sisters, 
extended family members, and friends are citizens and residents of that country. Having 
spent his adult life in the United States, Applicant has developed such significant 
relationships and financial interests that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 on July 28, 2011, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
 
2 
 
(SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the reasons for the action 
under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on November 18, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on 
December 14, 2011. At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of four 
witnesses. I received the transcript (Tr.) on December 27, 2011. 
 
At the end of the hearing, I left the record open for Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. He timely submitted documents, which were admitted as Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through D without objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Without objection from Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s written request 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Vietnam. The request has been 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The pertinent facts are set out, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant was born in Vietnam in 1963. His father served in the South 
Vietnamese Army during the 1960s. When the Communist Party took control of South 
Vietnam, his father was sent to a reeducation camp, where he was imprisoned for two 
years. Concerned about Applicant’s future, his parents sent him to live with an aunt in 
another city. In 1981, Applicant attempted to escape Vietnam by boat. However, a 
typhoon took the vessel off track and the boat became stranded on an island. 
Eventually, Applicant and his fellow escapees were rescued and taken to a refugee 
camp. He lived in the refugee camp until he was granted asylum in January 1982 and 
immigrated to the United States.2
 
 
Upon entering the United States, Applicant enrolled in high school and worked 
part time to support himself. After meeting Applicant, one of his teachers took him into 
her home, where Applicant lived as a member of her family. He lived with his “American 
family” while he finished high school and attended vocational school. Applicant 
considers his teacher and her husband his “American parents” and they consider 
Applicant their son. Applicant and his “American family” continue to have a strong 
relationship.3
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
  
 
2 Tr. 19-20; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. 46-50, 60-62; GE 2; AE B. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1988. Applicant’s wife, also a 
refugee from Vietnam, is a naturalized U.S. citizen. The couple has two children, ages 
10 and 11, who are U.S. citizens by birth. Applicant owns his home and has a net worth 
of approximately $500,000.4
 
  
Although his wife, children, and adopted family are in the United States, 
Applicant and his wife still maintain close contact to their relatives in Vietnam: 
Applicant’s mother, five sisters, four brothers-in-law, several aunts and uncles, as well 
as his wife’s two siblings. He also has several friends that are residents and citizens of 
Vietnam. Aside from Applicant’s uncle, a retired agricultural researcher, and one 
brother-in-law, who works for the postal service, none of Applicant’s other relatives or 
friends are connected to the Vietnamese government. Applicant travels to Vietnam at 
least once per year to visit his ailing, elderly mother. Because of her health, Applicant 
maintains frequent contact with her. Applicant reports his travels to Vietnam to his 
employer as required. He often gives money to his mother, other family members, and 
friends, as needed.5
 
 
Since October 2003, Applicant has worked as an engineering technician for a 
federal contractor. He is well regarded by his employer. Two of his coworkers testified at 
the hearing and an additional seven coworkers wrote character references on his 
behalf. All testify to Applicant’s superior work ethic, professionalism, technical ability, 
and strong character. Since at least 2006, he has received at least 12 awards for his 
performance, including a leadership award from the company’s president. Applicant was 
initially granted a security clearance in 2005 and has had access to classified 
information without incident.6
 
 
In January 2011, Applicant completed an interview with an investigator from the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). In a 50-page statement, Applicant described, 
in detail, his life in Vietnam, his escape from the country, his life since immigrating to the 
United States in 1982, his familial relationships and financial interests in the United 
States, and his Vietnamese relatives.7
 
 
Vietnam8
 
 
Vietnam is an authoritarian state ruled by the Communist Party of Vietnam 
(“CPV”). Since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1995, overlapping security 
and economic interests have led the United States and Vietnam to form a strategic 
partnership of sorts. Human rights, however, remain a lingering concern in the 
countries’ diplomatic relationship. The CVP seemingly follows a strategy of permitting 
                                                          
4 Tr. 20-21; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 21-22; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. 51-59; AE C – D. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 HE 1. 
 
4 
 
most forms of personal and religious expression while selectively repressing individuals 
and organizations that it deems a threat to the Party. The government increased its 
suppression of dissent in the last three years. Arbitrary detentions remain a problem, 
particularly for political activists. The government uses various measures to detain 
activists for the peaceful expression of opposing political views to include decrees and 
ordinances. The government does not tolerate attempts by organizations or individuals 
to comment publicly on its human rights practices, and it uses a wide variety of methods 
to suppress domestic criticism of its human rights policies, including surveillance, limits 
on freedom of the press and assembly, interference with personal communications, and 
detention. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”9
 
  
AG ¶ 7 indicates the disqualifying conditions that are applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has several family members who are residents and citizens of Vietnam, 
including his mother, sisters, brothers-in-law, his wife’s two siblings, as well as aunts, 
uncles, and friends.  The mere possession of close ties with family members living in a 
foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if 
an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. In assessing the likelihood 
that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to coercion or inducement, it is 
important to evaluate the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the 
United States, and its human-rights record. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress 
is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. Vietnam is 
controlled by an authoritarian government that is dominated by the CVP, which raises a 
heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
6 
 
In addition, Applicant’s close ties to his family are significant and merit 
consideration under Guideline B. He maintains regular contact with his Vietnamese 
family members, particularly his mother, through phone calls and visits. He also 
provides financial support to his family and friends as necessary. These close ties do 
give rise to a potential conflict of interest, which could put Applicant in the position of 
having to choose between protecting U.S. interests and his desire to help his foreign 
relatives.  
 
 The guideline also includes the following condition that could mitigate the security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Despite its authoritarian government, Vietnam and the United States maintain a 
favorable relationship. The record does not contain any information to suggest the 
existence of profound disagreements between the United States and Vietnam that raise 
any issues of national security. While the human rights abuses of the Vietnamese 
government remain an issue in this diplomatic relationship, the Vietnamese government 
focuses its attention on political dissenters. There is no evidence to suggest that any of 
Applicant’s family members fall into this category. Applicant’s family has not 
experienced negative treatment from the Vietnamese government since his father’s 
imprisonment in a reeducation camp or after Applicant escaped the country. Vietnam is 
not a known perpetrator of industrial espionage against the United States.  Nor is there 
any evidence to indicate that terrorist groups targeting American interests are operating 
within the country. Therefore, I conclude that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in 
a position where he has to choose between the interest of his Vietnamese relatives and 
the interest of the United States. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Family contacts and ties with persons in a foreign country are not automatically 
disqualifying, but require an applicant to present evidence in mitigation and extenuation 
that he qualifies for access to classified information. Despite Applicant’s strong familial 
ties to Vietnam, I find that AG ¶ 8(b) applies to this case. Applicant escaped from 
Vietnam in 1981, he survived life-threating conditions before being granted asylum in 
the United States. Since entering the country, Applicant has developed longstanding 
relationships with his “ American family” — a familial relationship that is just as 
strong, if not stronger than, his connections to his family in Vietnam. In addition to his 
 
7 
 
“American family”, Applicant has married, started his own family, and has accumulated 
significant financial interests in the United States. Viewed in totality, these factors lead 
me to the conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. Applicant has spent his adult life in the United States. He 
has cultivated deep and longstanding relationships. The evidence supports a finding 
that Applicant does not have divided loyalties between the United States and Vietnam. 
While Applicant has feelings of love and obligation towards his family in Vietnam, his life 
is firmly rooted here. Furthermore, Applicant has held a security clearance since 2005, 
without incident. He fully disclosed and provided details regarding his Vietnamese family 
members to the Government. His employer and coworkers laud his professionalism and 
integrity. He has shown himself to possess the strong character required of individuals 
granted access to classified information. Based on the evidence, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the Guideline B concerns raised in this case. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.e:  For Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                                             
  
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
