 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03952 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 30, 2010. On July 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines H and E. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On July 18, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the ready-to-proceed notification on October 12, 2011. 
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on November 17, 2011. The hearing was convened as scheduled on December 7, 
2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered one exhibit (AE) A, 
which was admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until 
December 14, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely 
submitted AE B and C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s email noting she had no objection to the post-hearing 
submissions was marked as HE 1. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 22, 2011. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 21-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
for his current employer in June 2010. He graduated from high school in 2008 and 
attended college for less than one year. He has never been married and has no 
children. This is the first time that he has sought a security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant was charged with Possession of Marijuana in 
May 2009 and that he used marijuana with varying frequency from May 2009 through 
July 2010. The SOR also alleged that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP by failing to 
disclose the exact duration of his marijuana usage. In his Answer, Applicant admitted 
both of the drug allegations, but indicated that he was not certain of the exact month he 
stopped using marijuana. He stated he could have stopped using marijuana in May, 
June, or July 2010. He denied the falsification allegation and stated he misunderstood 
the question. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
In Section 23a of his e-QIP, Applicant was asked if he had illegally used drugs in 
the last seven years. He answered “Yes” to that question and disclosed the following: 
 
Dates of use/activity 
 From (Month/Year): 05/2009  To (Month/Year): 05/2009 
 
Type of controlled substance(s) 
 Marijuana 
 
Explain (nature of use/activity, frequency of activity and number of times 
used) 
 recreational use at a party on Memorial weekend3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 4-5, 29-30, 39-40; GE 1.  
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 30-33; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
He also disclosed his marijuana offense in May 2009 in response to questions regarding 
his police record.4 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified he began using marijuana at the age of 16 in 
2006. He would use it on weekends with friends. He did not use marijuana while in 
college because he was a student athlete who was subject to drug tests. He began 
using it again after he left college. He failed to qualify for military service in about 
January 2009 because he tested positive for marijuana during an induction drug test. 
He testified that he has never used any illegal drugs other than marijuana and never 
grew or sold marijuana. He has not been diagnosed as a drug abuser or as drug 
dependent. He has not received any drug counseling or treatment. He has not 
undergone any drug tests while working for his current employer. He stated that he no 
longer associates with drug users. He currently has two roommates neither of whom 
uses marijuana. He testified that he does not intend to use marijuana again.5 
 
During an Office of Personnel Management interview in November 2010, 
Applicant reportedly indicated that he used marijuana from May 2009 to July 2010. He 
stated that he used marijuana about once a month with friends. He identified one friend 
with whom he used marijuana and indicated that he could not recall the names of other 
friends. He stated he obtained the marijuana either from friends or purchased it. He also 
advised the OPM investigator that he was rejected from the military because there was 
residue of marijuana in his system. The summary of that interview did not reflect if 
Applicant was specifically asked whether he used marijuana before his arrest in May 
2009.6 
 
In his Answer, Applicant acknowledged that he used marijuana “from at least 
May 2009 until approximately May, June, or July 2010.” He described his marijuana use 
as occasional. In addressing his marijuana arrest, he stated, 
 
I admit on May 2009 (Memorial Holiday Weekend), [X] County [State A], I 
was stopped by the [X] County Sherriff Department. The Sheriff smelled 
the strong odor of marijuana coming from my vehicle while I was stopped 
at a stop sign and they were approximately 6 to 10 feet in the median. As 
a result, I was ordered to pull over and my car, passengers, and I were 
searched. I was issued a ticket with the charge of “Simple Possession of 
Marijuana” because I had a very small amount of marijuana in my pants 
pocket. [Y] Law Firm, P.A. represented me in this matter and I was 
ordered to perform services at a [charitable organization] during the period 
of January 7, 2010 to March 5, 2010.7 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-36; GE 1.  
5 Tr. 28-30, 32-33, 36-37, 39-43; GE 2. 
6 GE 2.  
7 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
He also stated that he stopped using marijuana shortly before he started working for his 
current employer. As for the falsification allegation, he stated that the question was 
confusing and he did not understand how to answer it. At the hearing, he testified that 
he was rushed in filling out the e-QIP and misunderstood the question about marijuana 
usage. He also stated that he was arrested for an open container violation and pled 
guilty to illegal possession of alcohol, but did not remember the date of that arrest. After 
he filled out the e-QIP, he was also arrested for driving under suspension, which was 
later dismissed.8 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was open and forthcoming about his marijuana use. I 
found his testimony credible. In his post-hearing submission, he swore that he will no 
longer use illegal drugs and acknowledged that any future violation would subject him to 
an automatic revocation of his security clearance.9 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified that Applicant goes above and beyond the call of 
duty. He stated Applicant is reliable and trustworthy. He indicated that he trusts 
Applicant to watch his children and stated he would not let a drug user in his house. In 
his most recent evaluation, Applicant received the highest grades. In a reference letter, 
a manager described Applicant as one of his most dependable team players. The 
manager also indicated that Applicant displayed a high degree of integrity, 
responsibility, and ambition. He referred to Applicant as an exemplary employee.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
8 Tr. 27-28, 30-37, 43-47; GE 2. Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. Applicant testified that he was 
not sure when the open container violation occurred. His driver’s license was suspended because he 
failed to pay his insurance. His insurance was reinstated and the charge was dismissed. The open 
container and driving under suspension violations were not alleged in the SOR and will not be considered 
in applying the disqualifying conditions, but will be considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility and 
applying the whole-person concept. 
9 Tr. 27-47; AE C. 
10 Tr. 18-26; AE A. 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
 
6 
 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The guideline lists several conditions that could raise disqualifying security 
concerns under AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from approximately 2006 to 
mid-2010. During that time period, he purchased marijuana. In May 2009, he was 
charged with possession of marijuana. He was fined and served community service for 
that offense. In approximately January 2009, he tested positive for marijuana use during 
a military induction drug test. AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(b), and 25(c) are applicable. 
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana approximately weekly for a number of years. During 
that period, he was 16 to 20 years old. He has not used marijuana since he started 
working for his current employer in June 2010. He denied ever using any other types of 
illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was a youthful indiscretion. He is now well aware of 
its negative consequences. He signed a statement that he will abstain from any illegal 
drug use and acknowledged that failure to do so would result in revocation of his 
security clearance. He stated that he no longer associates with drug users. He currently 
 
7 
 
lives in a house with two roommates who do not use illegal drugs. He has made lifestyle 
changes that have taken him away from the drug scene. A sufficient period of 
abstinence has elapsed that demonstrates he put the illegal use of marijuana behind 
him. I find that AG ¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
On his e-QIP dated September 30, 2010, Applicant disclosed that he used 
marijuana in May 2009. He failed, however, to disclose accurately the dates that he 
started and terminated his marijuana use. He has consistently denied the falsification 
allegation. He testified that he was rushed in filling out the e-QIP and misunderstood the 
question about marijuana usage. At the hearing, he was open and forthcoming about 
his marijuana use. Applicant’s supervisors indicated that Applicant is trustworthy and 
displayed a high degree of integrity. I find that Applicant misunderstood the question in 
Section 32 of the e-QIP and did not intentionally fail to disclose the exact duration of his 
marijuana use. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. Personal Conduct security concerns are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
8 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has excelled in his current job. His character references vouch for 
his trustworthiness and reliability. His use of marijuana was a youthful indiscretion that 
he has put behind him. He now understands the negative consequences of using illegal 
drugs and is committed to abstaining from them. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
