 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04578 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally possessed and used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
between 1981 (age 16) and October 2010 (age 45). From 1998 until October 2010, she 
acquired marijuana from her cohabitant, and smoked the marijuana at home. Applicant 
used marijuana while working for a government contractor. She lives with her marijuana 
provider. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 9, 
2010. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators 
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding1
 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On June 22, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 15, 2011, and she elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated August 29, 2011, was provided to her by transmittal 
letter dated September 6, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on September 16, 2011. 
She was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material 
in extenuation and mitigation. She did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on November 29, 2011.  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegation in the SOR. Her admission is 
incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of 
record, including her SCA, her answer to the SOR, her response to a DOHA 
interrogatory, and her statement to a government investigator, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old production associate employed by a defense 
contractor. She attended college from August 2007 until December 2007, but she did 
not receive a degree. Between June 1983 and August 1991, Applicant was married and 
divorced three times. She has a 16-year-old daughter. Applicant has custody of her 
daughter, who visits with her father during the weekends.  
 
Applicant started working for her employer, a government contractor, in 
September 1999. Her November 2010 SCA is her first application for a security 
clearance. Applicant disclosed in her SCA that she illegally used marijuana from July 
1998 until October 2010, and that during the last seven years she had financial 
problems. She described her use of marijuana as “occasionally on the weekend.” She 
stated in her SCA that she decided to stop using marijuana “simply because it is not 
good for her lungs.” 
 
In December 2010, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
about her illegal drug use and financial problems. Applicant told the investigator that she 
started illegally using marijuana in 1981, when she was approximately 16 years old and 
attending high school. She was living with her step-sister because her mother had died. 
Her step-sister would bring the marijuana home and they smoked it while riding around 
on her back patio. Applicant estimated she experimented with marijuana approximately 
six or seven times when she was 16 years old, and about the same number of times at 
age 17. After graduating from high school, Applicant moved away from her step-sister’s 
home and never smoked marijuana with her again. Her step-sister died of a drug 
overdose in September 1994.  
 
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant also illegally used marijuana with her boyfriend (cohabitant) from 1998 
until October 2010. She met her boyfriend around July 1998, and he moved in with her 
in August 1998. (November 2010 SCA) Applicant’s boyfriend would bring her a 
marijuana cigarette, two or three times a month, usually during the weekends, and she 
smoked it on the patio behind her residence. Smoking the marijuana cigarette would 
give Applicant energy, and she would always accomplish her tasks around the house. 
Her most recent marijuana use was in October 2010. 
 
Applicant explained to the investigator that she never used marijuana around her 
daughter. Applicant would use the marijuana during those weekends when her daughter 
visited her father. Her daughter is now spending more weekends with Applicant. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana because she does not want to expose her daughter 
to marijuana, and because she wants to stop using marijuana. He boyfriend has agreed 
to never smoke marijuana in the house or around her daughter. Applicant told the 
investigator that she is not addicted to marijuana.  
 
Applicant has not discussed her use of marijuana with anyone else but her 
boyfriend. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show he has participated in 
drug counseling or rehabilitation. She presented no evidence of a recent diagnosis or 
prognosis concerning her use of illegal drugs.  
 
Policies 
 
The Secretary of Defense may grant eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
 
4 
 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally possessed and used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
between 1981 (age 16) and October 2010 (age 45). While in high school, she 
experimented with marijuana with her step-sister. From 1998 until October 2010, she 
acquired marijuana from her cohabitant, and smoked the marijuana at home. Applicant 
used marijuana while working for a government contractor. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) any drug abuse,3
 
 and 
(c) illegal drug possession. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s illegal marijuana 
use, although with varying frequency, spanned a period of approximately 29 years, and 
her use was not infrequent. She started using drugs while she was in high school (age 
16), and her use extended until October 2010 (age 45). She illegally used drugs socially, 
and not under extraordinary circumstances. She knew or should have known that her 
use of drugs was illegal and that it would adversely affect her ability to hold her job and 
a security clearance. She illegally used drugs for many years while working for a 
government contractor.  
                                            
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
 
Applicant claimed she last used marijuana in October 2010. She averred her 
intent not to use marijuana in the future because she does not want to expose her 
daughter to marijuana and because it is bad for her health. She did not submit a signed 
statement of intent not to use illegal drugs with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. Applicant has not discussed her use of marijuana with anyone but her 
boyfriend. Her live-in-boyfriend has been providing marijuana to Applicant during the last 
12 years.  
 
Applicant’s actions are not sufficient to mitigate drug involvement concerns. 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show she participated in any 
counseling or aftercare treatment program. She presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis or prognosis concerning her illegal drug use. In light of Applicant’s age, 
experience, the prolonged period she used drugs, her cohabitation with her marijuana 
provider, and her recent history of illegal drug use, her promise not to use drugs without 
corroboration (e.g., clear evidence of lifestyle changes, statements from those who know 
her about her disassociation from her drug-using friends, or a competent medical 
diagnosis and prognosis) is not sufficient to show her use of drugs is unlikely to recur. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s past 
questionable behavior casts doubt on her reliability, judgment, and willingness and 
ability to comply with the law. She failed to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). Applicant receives credit for disclosing her marijuana use in her 
SCA. She stopped using illegal drugs in October 2010. Apparently, she has done well 
working for a government contractor since 1999. She seems to be concerned about 
keeping her daughter away from illegal drugs, and has taken the first steps to being 
abstinent.  
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, her 29 years of illegal marijuana use, 
the recency of her last drug use, and her cohabitation with her marijuana provider, her 
promise not to use illegal drugs in the future is not sufficient to show her questionable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
