                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 04-05330
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire,  Department Counsel
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On March 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992,  issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 20, 2009, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 25, 2009. The case was scheduled for hearing on
August 18, 2009.  A hearing was held as scheduled, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or
deny Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of 11 exhibits (exs. 1-11); Applicant relied on seven witnesses (including
2
himself) and 23 exhibits (exs. A-W).  The transcript (Tr.) was received August 25, 2009.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
Besides its 11 exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of two  
documents: Background Note: Czech Republic, U.S. Department of State (July 2008)
and Country Specific Information, Czech Republic, U.S. Department of State (February
2009).  
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).  Administrative notice is appropriate
for noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice
was granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the
geopolitical situation in the Czech Republic.  Administrative notice was extended to the
documents themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.
This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of
the information contained in the reports addressing the Czech Republic’s current status.
Additionally, I have taken administrative notice, sua sponte, of the following
document: 2009 Investment Climate-Czech Republic, U.S. Department of State
(February 2009).  This document is covered by the same administrative notice
procedures as the previous documents, for which administrative notice was taken.
-
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant asked for additional time to supplement
the record with translation certifications.  For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
seven days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded three days to
respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with translation
certifications and a letter from his facility security officer (FSO) accepting Applicant’s
surrender of his Czech Republic passport with reservations. The submissions are
accepted as Applicant’s exhibits X through Z.   
By agreement, both parties were afforded time (to September 10, 2009) to file
closing written briefs.  Within the time permitted, each party filed a closing legal
memorandum for consideration of the merits. Both closings were accepted and
considered.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, it is alleged that Applicant: (1)  exercised dual citizenship with
the Czech Republic and the United States; (2) applied for and was granted Czech
Republic citizenship and issued a Czech Republic passport in about 2003, even though,
he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in about 1977; and (3) disclosed his possession of
3
a Czech passport, issued in July 2003 and not to expire until July 2013, in a January
2009 answer to a DOHA interrogatory.
Under Guideline B, it is alleged that Applicant (a) has a spouse (married in 1984)
who is a citizen of the Czech Republic; (b) owns property in the Czech Republic; (c)
have two brothers who are citizens and residents of the Czech Republic; (c) has a
sister-in-law who is a citizen and resident of the Czech Republic; (d) maintains a bank
account in the Czech Republic; and (e) traveled to the Czech Republic in 2003 and
2007.
Under Guideline E, it is alleged that Applicant (a) informed others in 1972 that he
had served in the Czechoslovakia army and trained North Vietnamese soldiers; (b)
submitted a reimbursement request for official travel reimbursement totaling $1,340 and
later attempted to resign from federal government service following his interrogation by
a special agent from the Naval Investigative Service regarding his falsification of his
travel claim; (c) was denied a security clearance in May 1986 due to the presence of
relatives in Czechoslovakia, and ultimately was terminated from federal service; (d)
falsified the SF-171 he executed in September 1985, by omitting his separation from
employment in 1983; (e) failed to report a contact with a suspected Czech intelligence
agent when he was interviewed by a special agent for the Defense Security Service
(DSS) in 1985 and 1987; (f) obtained Czech Republic citizenship and a Czech passport
after obtaining a DoD top secret clearance in 1997; and (g) failed to report to
appropriate personnel that he obtained Czech citizenship in 2003, in violation of
paragraph 1.302c of the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual
(NISPOM) of January 1995, as amended.   
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations without any
explanations.  He denied having a sister-in-law who is a citizen and resident of the
Czech Republic, and he denied his failing to report a suspected Czech intelligence
agent to DSS investigators when questioned in 1985 and 1987. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 62-year-old electrical engineer for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born in Czechoslovakia to a Czech mother and Russian father.
He never met his father, who served in the Russian military and was shipped back to
Russia shortly after he married Applicant’s mother in 1946 (see ex. 5).  Applicant was
raised by his mother in Czechoslovakia.  Russian authorities presented his mother with
divorce papers in 1953 and threatened to ship her to Russia if she did not sign them
(ex. 5). Under duress, she signed the divorce papers as instructed. With the Communist
4
Party’s seizure of Czechoslovakia in 1948, Applicant was raised in a country that was
subject to the controlling influence of the Soviet Union.  
Applicant enjoyed a relatively normal childhood and graduated from high school
in 1964 (see exs. 1 and 11). While a young school boy, Applicant recognized that he
had superior soccer skills and began playing the sport in organized junior leagues.  By
the time he was 15, he was playing soccer at a level he considered to be more than
professional (viz., paid by his company).  He played soccer throughout high school and
graduated from high school at the age of 19 (Tr. 113). 
After graduating from high school, Applicant was conscripted into the Czech
army and achieved the rank of sergeant during his three-year service tenure.  While in
the Czech army he was never assigned to duties outside of Czechoslovakia, and was
never involved in any military training exercises (see ex. 7).  He combined his work in
the electronics department of a railroad system with organized soccer (ex. 7; Tr. 114-
15).  As the result of his recognized superior soccer skills, he was assigned to the
country’s national soccer team (see ex.; Tr. 115).  He was discharged from the Czech
military in 1967 (see ex. 5).
In 1969, while traveling with his national Czech soccer team in Yugoslavia,
Applicant defected (see ex. 5; Tr.115).  He chose to settle in Germany where he
pursued a contract to play soccer for a German team (Tr. 115-16).  After playing soccer
for a year in Germany, he was banned from playing professional soccer because of an
angry outburst from the Czechs over his fleeing Czechoslovakia (Tr. 116). After
declining multiple offers to come to the United States to play professional soccer,
Applicant accepted an offer from a U.S. team to come and play for a U.S. soccer team
(Tr. 116).  
Applicant immigrated to the United States in May 1970.  Following his defection,
he separated from his wife, and divorced her in 1972 (see exs. 5 and 11).  She claimed
he fathered her child before their 1969 separation (ex. 5).  After many years of paternity
denial, he accepted his wife’s child as his daughter in 1977 and mailed support
payments to his ex-wife for many years (ex. 5).  
Applicant applied for U.S. citizenship, and was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in
March 1977 (see exs. 1 and 2).  Once in the United States, he worked for several
civilian companies pending his application for U.S. citizenship. After becoming a U.S.
citizen, he applied to the Czechoslovakian government for renunciation of his
Czechoslovakian citizenship  (Tr. 138).  Czech officials informed him that when he
became a U.S. citizen, he automatically lost his Czechoslovakian citizenship (see ex.
W; Tr. 137-39).
After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant entered a respected U.S. university and
pursued a curriculum in electrical engineering.  Upon transferring to another accredited
university in 1979, he earned an electrical engineering degree in 1982 (see exs. 3 and
4).  
5
In 1984, Applicant married a Czech citizen; he has one child (a son) from this
marriage (see exs. 5 and 11).  Their son is 25 years of age and resides with Applicant
and his wife (Tr. 214).  Applicant adopted his wife’s two children. They are adults and
reside in other states within the United States (Tr. 175).  Like Applicant, his children
became dual citizens of the United States and the Czech Republic (Tr. 174-76).  They
each possess a Czech passport in addition to their respective U.S. passports.  His wife
and children have traveled back and forth to the Czech Republic almost every year (Tr.
189).  His children, though, do not travel anymore (Tr. 191).  
Applicant’s wife retains her Czech citizenship. She remains a very patriotic
Czech, and did not emigrate to the United States to become a U.S. citizen, but to be
with Applicant  (Tr. 169).  Fearful for the safety of Applicant (in Applicant’s view), she
never applied for U.S. citizenship (Tr. 168-69). She intends to return to the Czech
Republic to live when circumstances permit. His wife is currently employed in the United
States as a sales representative for a U.S. company and makes between $10 and $11
an hour (Tr. 170). She is trained as an economist and worked in that field in
Czechoslovakia.
Applicant has two half-brothers who are citizens and residents of the Czech
Republic. His youngest half-brother (age 59) owns a security service that provides
guards for factories.  He is independently wealthy and requires no financial assistance
from Applicant (Tr. 185).  His oldest half-brother (almost 60) works in electronics, and is
very poor (Tr. 181-84).  Applicant provides some financial assistance to this half-brother
by giving him all of his sportswear clothing, which his brother, in turn, sells for a profit
(exploiting Applicant’s celebrity status).  
Applicant’s sister-in-law (previously a citizen and resident of the Czech Republic)
recently expired (Tr. 129, 147).  Before she passed away, she maintained periodic
contact with Applicant’s wife.
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has worked for a variety of employers in
the public and private sectors (see exs. 1, 3, and 4).  Beginning in May 1982, he worked
for the U.S. Air Force in a civilian capacity as an engineer (see ex. 2). 
After a brief period of unemployment between June 1983 and January 1984,
Applicant went to work for the Navy in a civilian role.  Records show that he resigned
from his Navy position in June 1984 to avoid adverse action against him (see ex. 11).
His employer charged him with claiming false expenses in excess of $1,000 (ex. 11).
When later confronted with the charges by a Coast Guard investigator (investigating his
Coast Guard clearance application), records indicate he admitted to making
unauthorized overseas calls and filing improper travel claims.  Coast Guard records
indicate he agreed to make restitution (ex. 11). 
In his 1987 DSS interview, Applicant assured that he never accepted the Navy’s
termination reasons and later denied falsifying travel expense forms, and resigning his
Navy position under threat of adverse personnel action (see ex. 6; Tr. 128).  However,
1
   The law offering the opportunity to former Czech citizens to reacquire their Czech citizenship is identified
in exhibit U as Law #193/1999.  This law expressly affords former Czech citizens the opportunity of former
Czech citizens of Communist-ruled Czechoslovakia who had lost their Czech citizenship by naturalization in
the United States  from 1957 to 1990, or whom acquired citizenship from another country with an international
6
he has never provided any documentary proofs to support his denials (see exs. 5
through 8).  Absent more probative evidence from Applicant on the circumstance of his
Navy resignation, the Coast Guard’s termination is accepted as the most reliable
version of the covered events. 
Following several months of unemployment, he joined a large defense contractor
in January 1985, and stayed with this firm through June 1986 (see ex. 4; Tr. 128-30).
His assignments, performance, and circumstances of departure are not documented.
Applicant returned to the public sector in February 1986. He accepted an
engineering position with the Coast Guard.  Records reveal, however, that he falsely
represented in his application for Coast Guard employment that he had never been
terminated from federal service, or resigned in lieu of termination (see ex. 11),
obscuring the circumstances in which he resigned from his previous Navy service in lieu
of adverse action.  Because his engineering position required a security clearance, he
was required to submit to another background investigation for his clearance.  Based on
investigation reports of his having family members residing in Czechoslovakia (still a
Communist-ruled country in the 1980s). Applicant was denied a security clearance, and
was terminated from his Coast Guard position in June 1986 (ex. 4). 
  All of the facts and circumstances developed by the Coast Guard are covered in
a 1986 termination letter that was attached and incorporated in a 1986 Merit System
Protection Board decision affirming Applicant’s denial of a security clearance based on
his having relatives in a Communist-controlled country (Czechoslovakia). Because the
Coast Guard’s denial of Applicant’s security clearance preceded its completion of its
investigation into the circumstances of Applicant’s Navy resignation, the Board declined
to reach the merits of Applicant’s challenges of his Coast Guard termination (see ex.
11).  
 After leaving the Coast Guard, Applicant returned to the private sector.  Between
January 1987 and the present, he has worked for a series of defense contractors (see
exs. 1 and 4).  Each of his positions required a security clearance, which he has held
continuously since 1987.
Applicant’s restoration of  his Czech citizenship and passport
In 2003, Applicant learned from a friend that the Czech Republic was offering
former citizens of Communist-ruled Czechoslovakia, who escaped the Iron Curtain
between 1948 and 1990, the opportunity to regain their birthright citizenship by simply
asking for it to be reinstated by the Czech Republic and forwarding their birth certificate
and other pertinent documentation to the proper Czech authorities (see ex. V; Tr. 136).1
treaty with the Czech Republic prohibiting double citizenship between 1948 and 1990,  to regain their Czech
citizenship.  Each application requires the applicant to fill out a declaration and forward it, along with a birth
certificate and other documents (in some cases) to the appropriate Czech consulate (see ex. U).
7
Concerned about protecting his wife’s property interests in the Czech Republic, and
preserving his opportunities to return with his wife to live there in the future, Applicant
exercised this option in July 2003 (see exs. 10 and 12; Tr. 141-44, 164).  In addition to
acquiring dual citizenship in the Czech Republic, he also obtained a Czech passport.
Issued in July 2003, his Czech passport  will not expire until 2013 (see exs. 10 and 12). 
Applicant’s in-laws passed away in 2004 (see exs. 9 and T; Tr. 144).  While in
the Czech Republic for his father-in-law’s funeral, Applicant used his Czech passport to
add his name to the title of property in the Czech Republic that he and his wife inherited
from her father after his death (Tr. 166-67). 
Once Applicant regained his Czech citizenship and Czech passport, he did not
notify his facility security officer (FSO) or any authorized member of his employer’s
organization of his actions. He acknowledged the NISPOM procedures that governed
his security clearance eligibility required clearance holders like himself to notify their
FSOs when they acquired foreign citizenship and a foreign passport (Tr.  160).  He
worried, though, that “these people in JT3 are too incompetent to understand and I don’t
want to say anything” (Tr. 160).  So, Applicant did not report to his FSO or other
appropriate personnel within his employer’s organization that he had obtained Czech
Republic citizenship and a Czech passport.
Asked in a 2008 DOHA interrogatory whether he had any foreign passports in his
possession, Applicant acknowledged having a Czech passport, which he left in the
Czech republic (see ex. 9).  He later volunteered information about his accepting an
offer from the Czech government in 2003 to regain his Czech citizenship without having
to forfeit his U.S. citizenship (ex. 9).  Besides informing DOHA of his regained Czech
citizenship and passport, he has let his supervisors know of his actions (Tr. 99-104.
Applicant’s explanations were made without any visible confrontation, and reflect
voluntary, good-faith disclosures of his regained Czech citizenship and receipt of a
Czech passport.
For some years after receiving his Czech passport, he kept it at his home, never
using it to travel abroad.  He took his Czech passport with him to attend his father-in-
law’s funeral in 2004, and left it in the Czech Republic for safe-keeping when he
returned to the United States (Tr. 165-67).  He assures he  never used it to enter or exit
the Czech Republic (Tr. 165-67). He admitted to needing his Czech passport, though,
for acquiring or preserving inherited Czech property (Tr. 166-67, 177-78). 
By placing his name on the house and property his wife inherited from her father
in 2004, Applicant acquired joint ownership (Tr. 178). Since acquiring joint ownership in
his wife’s inherited property, he invested approximately $20,000 towards the building of
the house on the property (Tr. 179).  He estimates the home and property to be worth
8
approximately $150,000 to $200,000 in U.S. dollars (Tr. 180).  Besides his home and
property, Applicant maintains a bank account in the Czech Republic (Tr. 192). He uses
this account to help defray the expenses of his family and their relatives (Tr. 148).  He
estimates the value of this account to be $1,000 to $1,500 in U.S. dollars (Tr. 193).
Asked whether he was willing to renounce his Czech citizenship, Applicant
declined (Tr.  163).  He indicated he will need his Czech citizenship when he relocates
to the Czech Republic with his wife after he retires from his U.S. employment.  Both he
and his wife desire to return to the country of their birth, where they have their home,
family, and friends (Tr. 178). Applicant still enjoys celebrity status in the Czech Republic
and is very proud of his Czech roots.   
When asked by Department Counsel whether he was willing to surrender his
Czech passport, Applicant expressed reluctance to do so without assurances the
passport would be returned to him when he retires (Tr. 161).  Afforded an opportunity to
further consider his surrender of his Czech passport after the conclusion of the hearing,
Applicant submitted a letter from his FSO confirming Applicant’s surrender of his Czech
Republic passport and its placement in a secure container for safekeeping (see ex. X).
Applicant placed restrictions on his passport surrender as follows: Should he request
return of the passport at any time, the FSO is instructed to immediately notify
Applicant’s supervisors, the senior managers of JT3, LLC, and the government official
responsible for coordinating security matters with the FSO (ex. X).  Implicit in the
surrender reservations is Applicant’s right to request and obtain a release of his Czech
passport at any time, subject to the noted restrictions.  Under these circumstances,
Applicant’s passport surrender amounts to a bailment with no time limits placed on
Applicant’s right to the return of the passport.
Applicant’s visits to the Czech Republic
Since becoming a U..S. citizen, Applicant has made five return visits to the
Czech Republic between December 1982 and August 1986 while Czechoslovakia was
still controlled by the Soviet Union and its Czech allies (see ex. 7).  At the time of one of
his visits, he was still employed by the U.S. Air Force and held a security clearance (Tr.
195).  When he arrived in Czechoslovakia, he was met at the airport by over 2,000
adoring fans, who still remembered his celebrity soccer status (Tr. 122).  At the Czech
entry office, he was questioned by a Czech agent (Agent A).  Applicant suspected this
agent was a member of Czech intelligence (see ex. 7; Tr. 150).  Applicant expressed
confidence that the Czech agent possessed detailed intelligence about Applicant’s
background and Air Force employment (Tr. 150).
Records show Applicant returned to Czechoslovakia in the summer of 1983 for
approximately 30 days (see ex. 7). While in the country, he was followed by uniformed
authorities and individuals in plain clothes (see ex. 8).  When Agent A met him, he
inquired of Applicant what he would say if he were asked to work for the Czech
government (ex. 8). Applicant showed a map of the island chain of his state of
residence. This map revealed all sections of the state and listed military bases, the
airport, and other landmarks, but was not a classified document (see ex. 7).  At one
9
time, Applicant estimated that he may have obtained the map through his Air Force
employment.  However, he denied this possibility at hearing. At some point on this 1983
trip, Applicant recollects relinquishing his wrist watch to Agent A, after Agent A inquired
of Applicant whether there was anything inside the watch (ex. 7). Based on the
identifying information from his apartment manager, Applicant believed the Czechs
searched his U.S. apartment as well (Tr. 156).
In February 1984, Applicant returned to Czechoslovakia to marry his wife and be
present for the birth of his son (Tr. 124-25).  He returned in September 1984 to move
his wife and children to the United States (Tr.125-26).  On each occasion he met with
Agent A and was called to a Czech office to confirm in writing that he did not wish to
work for the Czechoslovakian  government (Tr. 157).  
Applicant traveled again to Czechoslovakia in 1992 (months before the country
was split in two by peaceful agreement, which paved the way for the establishment of
the Czech Republic) to visit family members (Tr. 190).  He made another trip to the
Czech Republic in 2000, and again in 2004 for his father-in-law’s funeral (Tr. 136). His
last trip to the Czech Republic was in 2007 to attend his mother’s funeral (see ex. U; Tr.
149).
Applicant was twice interviewed by DSS agents in the 1980s. When first
interviewed by a DSS investigator (in April 1985), Applicant discussed his Czech
heritage and  his naturalization as a U.S. citizen.  In this interview, he disclosed his four
visits to Czechoslovakia between 1982 and 1984 (see ex. 5). He assured that if he were
ever approached by persons seeking his assistance in doing harmful acts against the
United States, he would file a proper report with federal authorities.  However, Applicant
did not disclose his multiple contacts with Agent A.
Asked what he would do if approached by representatives of a hostile power in a
follow-up DSS interview in 1987, Applicant assured he would dismiss any attempts to
pressure or influence him, and would notify the nearest FBI office in the event the
person persisted in trying to influence him to engage in any adverse activity against the
United States (see ex. 6). Once again, he did not disclose his contacts with Agent A. 
Interviewed for a third time by a DSS agent (this one in March 1990), Applicant
disclosed his contacts with Agent A for the first time (see ex. 7).  It is not clear from his
signed, sworn statement covering this interview whether he was confronted by the
investigator in any way with information about Agent A.  When later asked by the same
DSS agent in a follow-up DSS interview why he did not disclose his contacts with Agent
A earlier, he explained that he was advised by FBI personnel he interviewed with in
1983 while looking for work that Agent A’s contacts were not important from an
intelligence perspective. 
 
Because no one from DSS or other U.S.  Government sources ever asked him
specifically about foreign contacts during his travels to Czechoslovakia, he never
considered them significant enough to merit his disclosing them (ex. 8). While his
10
explanations are cause for concern, considering his experiences and knowledge of
Czechoslovakia when interviewed between 1985-1987, his explanations were never
challenged by the Government before this hearing, and are sufficiently plausible to
warrant acceptance herein.  
Czech Republic’s Country Status
The Czech Republic was established in January 1993, and has a democratic
government that is comprised of three branches: a president (chief of state), prime
minister (head of government), cabinet, bicameral legislature, and a judiciary that
includes a Supreme Court and a Constitutional court (see Background Note: Czech
Republic, supra).  The Czech Republic has a large diverse economy with a GDP of
$176.5 billion in 2007 (id., at 2).  The majority of its 10.3 million residents are ethnically
and linguistically Czech.
Historically, the Czech Republic formed the western part of the Czech and
Slovakia federal Republic. Once an independent state, the Czechs lost their national
independence to the Hapsburgs Empire in 1620, and for the ensuing 300 years were
ruled by the Austrian monarchy (see Background Note: Czech Republic, supra).  The
two republics were consolidated into a common state after WW I that comprised
Czechs, Moravians, and Slovaks. Able to bridge longstanding cultural differences, the
Czechs and Slovaks joined to form an independent country with President Wilson’s
support at the close of WW I (id., at 2-3).
Germany invaded Czechoslovakia in March 1939 and established a German
protectorate ((see Background Note: Czech Republic, supra).  By this time, Slovakia
had declared its independence and had become a puppet state of the Germans.
 Soviet troops overran all of Slovakia, Moravia, and much of Bohemia at the
close of WW II (see Background Note: Czech Republic, supra, at 3).  Most of Western
Bohemia was liberated by U.S. forces.  Despite their reunification efforts after the war
(led by President Benes), their efforts were rebuffed by Soviet-backed forces. Through
dubious claims of legality, the Communist Party seized power in February 2008 (id.).
Following brief periods of token reforms by the Communist party, the party
replaced their head (Novotny) with a Slovak, Alexander Dubcek in January 1968 (see
Background Note: Czech Republic, supra, at 3-4). Under Dubcek’s leadership,
Czechoslovakia initiated political-military changes in the Soviet-dominated Warsaw Pact
and expressed desires to improve relations with the West. Dubcek’s modernization
efforts fueled discord among other Warsaw governments, though, and prompted the
invasion by Warsaw Pact forces in August 1968 (id.).  Dubcek and his party reformers
were replaced by another Slovak, Gustav Husek.  Throughout the 1970s and 1980s (an
era termed the period of normalization), apologists of the 1968 soviet-led invasion
backed their conservative regime.     
11
Human rights activism was responsible for the 1989 Civic Forum movement that
seized power during the so-called “Velvet Revolution” under the leadership of a
dissident playwright: Vaclav Havel (see Background Note: Czech Republic, supra, at 4).
Civic Forum and its Slovak counterpart (Public Against Violence) energized millions of
Czechs and Slovaks and were instrumental in the repudiation and collapse of the
Communist party in Czechoslovakia.      
With an increasing number of democratic groups seeking influence in
Czechoslovakia following the Soviet retreat, Slovak calls for more autonomy impeded
the functioning of the federal government in Czechoslovakia.  Federalists could not
stem the growing pressures for a split between th Czechs and Slovaks. With President
Halvel’s resignation in July 1992, party leaders for the Czechs (Vaclav  Klaus) and the
Slovaks (Vladamir Mecian) reached an agreement that the two republics would
separate and become independent states by the end of 1992 (see Background Note:
Czech Republic, supra, at 4-5).    
Klaus remains the president of the Czech Republic. He was re-elected in
February 2008.  The country’s chamber of deputies split roughly 200 seats between
three center-right parties and two parties on the left (see Background Note: Czech
Republic, supra, at 5). The chamber currently operates under a fragile three-party
coalition that has survived several challenges since 2006 (id.).  
The Czech Republic adhered to the foreign policy of the former Soviet Union
from 1948 until 1989, but since independence, the Czechs have made integration with
Western institutions their major priority. Today, the Czech Republic is a member of
NATO (since March 1999) and the European Union (since May 2004).  Membership in
both of these organizations represent major advances in the Czech Republic’s Western-
leaning foreign policy.
United States-Czech bilateral relations have improved considerably since the
onset of the Velvet Revolution in 1989.  Relations between the two countries are strong
and reflect common interests and understandings about the challenges facing the world,
from Afghanistan to the Balkans. 
The Czech government is generally receptive to foreign investment, and
continues to offer incentives for certain types of foreign direct investment on a non-
discriminatory basis (see 2009 Investment Climate-Czech Republic, supra, at 1-2). The
1993 United States-Czech bilateral investment treaty contains specific guarantees of
national treatment and most-favored nation treatment for U.S. investors in all areas of
the economy other than insurance and real estate (id. at 2, 7-8). 
Acquisitions and other transactions involving real estate in the Czech Republic by
foreign persons are controlled by Czech law, however, which limits purchasing and
financing of Czech real estate to Czech residents and non-resident Czech citizens.
These real estate limitations are contained in the Czech Republic’s foreign exchange
act (no. 219/1995 coll.). 
12
The Czech Republic has a good human rights record and a demonstrated
commitment to the rule of law.  While civil disorder is rare in the Czech republic, U.S.
citizens traveling to the country are advised by the State Department to remain vigilant
about their personal security (see Country Specific Information, Czech Republic, supra,
at 2).  
     
Endorsements
Applicant has excellent character references to his credit.  Air Force civilians who
currently supervise or work with Applicant, or have done so in the past, credit him with
unique engineering and linguistic skills. They consistently characterize Applicant as
conscientious, dedicated, reliable and trustworthy (see exs. D through S)  Consistently,
they stress his conscientious work habits and recommend him to a position of trust.
Most of them, however, do so without any detailed knowledge of his retirement
intentions or specific circumstances associated with his regaining his Czech citizenship
and passport (see exs. H, D, F, J, K, and S; Tr. 62-64, 69-75; 48-55, 87-90, and 94-98).
One of his character witnesses expressed his understanding that Applicant intended to
retire to the Czech republic when he reaches the retirement age of 65 (Tr. 83-84).  His
Department head expressed her belief that Applicant might one day want to return to
the Czech Republic, but could offer no details of any specific retirement plans (Tr. 99-
103).  She cited her government customer’s awareness of his Czech citizenship and
passport issues (Tr. 104).
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) list guidelines to be used by
administrative judges in the decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These
guidelines take into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for
the individual applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. These guidelines
include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying”
(disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate
security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in reaching at a decision. Each
of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance
with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial, commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk.  When evaluating an applicant’s
13
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate preference
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
See AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
14
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends,
in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Born and raised in the old Communist-ruled Czechoslovakia, Applicant (a
nationally renowned soccer player) defected in 1969 and immigrated to the United
States in 1970.  Over the course of the next 35 plus years he obtained an engineering
degree from an accredited U.S. university, worked in various jobs in the public and
private sectors that required security clearances, married a Czech citizen, and raised
three children (two of whom he adopted). 
Trust concerns relate to both foreign preference and foreign influence associated
with Applicant’s longstanding ties to the Czech Republic and its predecessor
Czechoslovakia, his regaining his Czech citizenship and a Czech passport with the
intention of retiring in the Czech Republic in a home he and his wife recently inherited
and developed. 
And, trust concerns arise over documented misstatements of Applicant in the
past about his travel claim submissions, work history claims in employment applications,
omissions of pertinent information about foreign agents of the former Czechoslovakia in
DSS interviews, and his failure to report his obtaining Czech citizenship to appropriate
personnel in violation of paragraph 1.302.c of the NISPOM, as amended.  Applicant’s
recurrent actions raise concerns about pattern dishonesty and rule violations that are
covered by the personal conduct guideline.
15
Foreign Preference 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country over the interests of the United States. The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the United States.  By virtue of his
taking advantage of a special window of opportunity afforded by the Czech government
in 2003, he acquired Czech citizenship and a Czech passport.  He continued to retain
and use his Czech citizenship and passport to vest and protect his acquired real estate
in the Czech Republic, where he hoped to reside  following his eventual retirement from
his U.S. job. 
Not until after the hearing did he surrender his Czech passport to his FSO, and
he did so with the understanding he would not be renouncing his Czech citizenship, and
would be entitled to recover his passport upon request. Although subject to government-
reporting conditions should he ever request return of his passport, his arrangement
clearly does not represent an irrevocable surrender, and reflects a qualified
understanding more indicative of a bailment-type arrangement or conditional surrender. 
While Applicant’s surrender of his Czech passport may be sufficient to satisfy the
technical surrender requirements of MC ¶ 11(e) of the AGs for foreign preference (see
discussion infra), it does not in of itself resolve the larger preference question raised in
this case.  Whether Applicant’s collective actions reflect an overall preference for his
birth country (the Czech Republic), or formulated retirement plan that is not
incompatible with his imposed fiduciary duties to the United States, are issues that
require reconciling with the security requirements demanded of those who are afforded
access to classified information. 
Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has taken several actions
and exercised Czech privileges that reflect active indicia of dual citizenship.
Specifically, he regained his Czech citizenship in 2003 that he implicitly renounced
under Czech law when he accepted U.S. citizenship in 1977.  Applicant also obtained a
Czech passport that he used to secure his name on Czech realty his wife inherited from
her father in 2004. He has expressed his unwillingness to renounce the Czech
citizenship he obtained under special circumstances in 2003, and has surrendered his
Czech passport on the implicit condition he can have it back when he retires from his
U.S. job, and returns to the Czech Republic to live with his Czech spouse. 
In assessing split-preference cases, the Appeal Board has looked to indicia of
active exercise of dual citizenship.  Where the subject applicant has relied on his foreign
citizenship and passport to own and service property in a foreign country that restricts
ownership to residents and individuals with citizenship in that country, the Board has
considered such actions to constitute important considerations of preference.  See
ISCR Case No. 16098 at 2 (App. Bd.  May 29, 2003). 
16
So, too, in cases where there is record evidence of a dual-citizen applicant’s
having substantial real property interests in a country that are not available to non-
residents or citizens on the same terms, the Appeal Board has considered such
interests to represent special benefits or privileges that reveal a preference to that
particular country.  See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009). 
Here, Applicant used his prior Czechoslovakian birth and citizen status to restore
his Czech citizenship and obtain a Czech passport that enabled him to qualify for
placing his name on his wife’s inherited real estate in the Czech Republic.  His regaining
his Czech citizenship and passport enabled him to qualify for acceptance of prospective
inheritance benefits following her father’s death.  His actions represent material indicia
of a preference for the Czech Republic that cannot be easily reconciled with the split
preference he has shown for many years for his adopted country, the United States.  
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can
be trusted in the future to honor his fiduciary responsibilities to the Government.  In
Applicant’s case, he was manifestly aware of the security significance of his obtaining
Czech citizenship and a Czech passport while continuing to hold a U.S. security
clearance.  For he admittedly failed to report to appropriate personnel that he obtained
his Czech citizenship and passport, in violation of paragraph 1.302.c of the NISPOM.
And, he acknowledged his acute mistrust in the JT3 people responsible for processing
his foreign citizenship information.  While his choices may be understandable, they also
reflect a current and ongoing preference for his roots in the Czech Republic over his
longstanding preferences for the United States.   
Because Applicant regained his Czech citizenship and Czech passport while still
holding a U.S. security clearance (without notifying appropriate officials), the
Government may apply certain provisions of disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG
¶ 9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This DC includes but
is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such         
           benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another    
           country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
17
(7) voting in a foreign election.”  
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1)(3) and (5) both apply to the established facts and
circumstances herein.  By regaining his Czech citizenship and passport, Applicant was
able to accept special real estate and mortgage borrowing benefits in the Czech
Republic that are not currently available to non-Czech residents and citizens. The
Czech Republic’s foreign exchange act (Act No. 210/1995) restricts the acquisition of
real estate in the country to residents and non-resident Czech citizens.  
Were Applicant to renounce his Czech citizenship and unconditionally surrender
his Czech passport, he risks a potential forfeiture of his property and his inability to
regain his Czech citizenship status once he assumed retirement status in the country.
His election to retain the Czech citizenship he acquired and reserve his right to retrieve
the Czech passport he turned over for safekeeping represent entirely rational and
understandable choices on Applicant’s part.  They also reflect clear preferences for his
home country of the Czech Republic, where he hopes to retire with his wife in a few
years.  
Applicant surrendered his Czech passport in August 2009, in accordance with
established procedures for surrendering a foreign passport to a cognizant security
authority. In doing so, he does forfeit the short-term flexibility of unfettered and
undocumented travel.  Applicant is quite right on this point. And, he may, accordingly,
claim the benefits of another mitigating condition under Guideline C. MC  ¶ 11(e), “the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated,” is fully applicable as well to Applicant’s situation.  Because his
dual citizenship status is not based solely on his parent’s citizenship, he may not claim
the benefits of MC ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or
birth in a foreign country.” Nor are any of the other potential mitigating conditions
available to Applicant based on the developed record. 
Whole person precepts are certainly helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s preference concerns herein.  The strong trust impressions he has forged
with his supervisors, coworkers and friends who have worked with him add support to
his claims that during his more than 25 years of faithful service to the defense industry
he has demonstrated undivided loyalty and preference for U.S. institutions and this
country’s core values.  
Overall, though, Applicant is not able to persuade that his current preference is
still with the United States. Because he made considerable use of Czech privileges
associated with his regaining his Czech citizenship and passport in 2003 during a
narrow window of opportunity bestowed on former citizens of Czechoslovakia who
defected before 1990, he manifested a preference for the Czech Republic under the
criteria as established by the Appeal Board. Applicant fails to absolve himself of foreign
preference concerns associated with the presented issue of whether his preference lies
with his adopted country (United States), or the country where he was born and raised
(currently the Czech Republic) before he defected in 1969 to escape Communist rule.
18
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d of Guideline C.
Foreign influence 
Applicant and his family have deep roots in the Czech Republic, a country rich in
history and socio/political traditions, and Communist domination during the post WW II
years.  Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Communist Party in 1989, the
reconstituted Czech Republic has flourished under well-established constitutional
government and institutional respect for human rights, and benefits from strong bilateral
relations with the United States. As a member of NATO and the European Union, the
Czech Republic has been able to forge strong political, military and economic ties with
Western Europe, as well as the United States.  Foreign ownership of real estate in the
Czech Republic remains one of the few areas of disagreement between the Czech
Republic and this country.
The Government urges trust concerns over risks that Applicant might use his
Czech contacts to exploit his real estate and other interests in the Czech Republic as he
prepares himself and his family for retirement in that country.  Because he still has two
brothers and his wife’s family members residing in the Czech Republic, he might be
subject to undue foreign influence by Czech government authorities to access sensitive
proprietary information in Applicant’s possession or control.  As such, he and his family
present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) ¶
7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend,
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of these
family members in the Czech Republic, combined with Applicant’s own demonstrated
preference for the country, do pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of
the risks of undue foreign influence that could potentially affect his use of his acquired
real estate in the Czech Republic.  
Applicant has no immediate family members resident in the Czech Republic,
except for his two brothers (only one of whom he has provided any financial support).
And neither of his brothers have any known relationships with the Czech government or
military.  Moreover, his wife’s parents and sister are all deceased, and she has no
relatives who have contacts with Applicant. Any potential conflict that might be
associated with her deceased husband’s pension benefits is small and not likely to pose
any conflicts of interest for Applicant in the foreseeable future.  And, from all that is
known, Applicant’s  spouse does not have any identified prior military or government
service that could create potential conflicts of interest.   
 Because none of Applicant’s living family or his wife’s family have any identified
family members that could place any of them in any foreseeable conflict situation, no
consideration of DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
19
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign
person, group, or country by providing that information,” is warranted herein.
Applicant and his immediate family members (i.e., his younger brothers) residing
in the Czech Republic have deep family roots in their country of birth. Their citizenship
status and presence in the Czech Republic does not by itself create a heightened risk.
Applicant’s contacts with his family members are manageable risks, and clearly not of
the magnitude that could make them subject to a heightened security risk of pressure or
compromise under Guideline B.  As a country, the Czech Republic has a lengthy history
of constitutional government and generally recognized respect for human rights and the
rule of law. It maintains a strong bilateral relationship with the United States in the
important areas of trade and investment. The Czech Republic continues to be a country
with emerging strategic relationships with the United States in the War on Terror, and is
a country that at present does not present a heightened risk under Guideline B.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the
supplied materials and country information about the Czech Republic.  Unlike the old
AGs, the new ones do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with the
United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives
with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The
geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.”  is
available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant, his wife, nor his immediate or extended family
residing in the Czech Republic pose heightened security risks that could subject them to
potential pressures and influence from Czech Republic government and military
officials. 
Of benefit to Applicant, too, is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated
loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to the United States, is well
demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances to neutralize all potential
conflicts that are implicit in his relationships with his relatives. MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
20
likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has some
applicability, too, based on Applicant’s infrequent contacts with his younger brothers.
 
 MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” is not available to
Applicant.  His financial interests in the Czech Republic are considerable and account
for major reasons why he has been unwilling to renounce his Czech citizenship and
surrender his Czech passport unconditionally.
Not available to Applicant either is MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly
complied with existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts,
requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.”
Applicant was slow to recognize the importance of his contacts with Agent A and
acknowledge his meetings with Agent A several years later when he was re-interviewed
by a DSS agent.  And, Applicant failed to promptly notify appropriate personnel of his
acquiring Czech citizenship and a Czech passport in accordance with NISPOM
requirements.
Whole person assessment is available to minimize Applicant’s exposure to any
potential conflicts of interests with his Czech family members residing in the Czech
Republic.  His supervisors and coworkers who have worked with him for many years
and consider him very reliable and trustworthy.  Moreover, Applicant is not aware of any
risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of his family members might be
exposed to.  So, in Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion, pressure, or influence
being brought to bear on him, his wife, or any of their family members residing in the
Czech Republic is minimal and mitigated.  Applicant has no immediate family members
resident in the Czech Republic
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's having
property interests and family members residing in the Czech Republic are sufficiently
mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand any
Czech risks of undue influence. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B.
Personal Conduct 
Personal conduct concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness are raised under Guideline E as the result of his exhibited past failures
to promptly and properly  report his travel expense claims while employed by the Navy,
the reasons for his Navy resignation, the circumstances surrounding  his contacts with
Agent A in the early 1980s, and his regaining his Czech citizenship and passport in
2003 (after being issued a top secret security clearance). His actions reflect serious
lapses in judgment and trust for which ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rules
violations,” of the AGs for personal conduct is applicable.  
21
Most of Applicant’s judgment lapses are quite aged and were well known to the
Government by 1990.  By this time, Applicant had already held a security clearance with
the defense contractors who employed him.  His disclosures to DSS investigators in
1990 of his contacts with Agent A during his prior visits to Czechoslovakia does not
appear to have adversely affected his security clearance status in any visible way.
Applicant has continued to hold security clearances with defense contractors for
the ensuing 19 years he has worked in the defense industry.  During this period, he has
impressed his supervisors and coworkers with his engineering and linguistic skills, his
conscientious work habits, and his exhibited trustworthiness. He is credited with
following all of his employers’ administrative and security guidelines in his numerous
tasked assignments and has not been cited with any other security breaches.
Applicant’s failure to promptly notify appropriate personnel of his obtaining his
Czech citizenship (in violation of paragraph 1.302.c of the NISPOM) is more recent and
was undertaken with Applicant’s clear knowledge of the reporting requirements for
clearance holders like himself.  But Applicant has since told his department head, who
notified her company’s government customer. Applicant is also on record as fully
disclosing his obtaining Czech citizenship and a Czech passport in his 2008 answers to
DOHA interrogatories.   
Mitigating conditions are available to Applicant based on the age of his cited
misrepresentations and omissions that occurred in the 1980s and have long been
known to the Government.  MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is applicable to Applicant’s situation.  
True, recurrent action, such as Applicant’s initial non-disclosure of his Czech
citizenship and passport as a clearance holder, can, if not separately mitigated, create a
recurrent pattern of breaches of recognized employment norms, rules and regulations
that could require continued scrutiny. However, more recent citizenship and passport
non-disclosures are mitigated by corrective actions.  Without a recurrent pattern to
evaluate, Applicant’s older judgment lapses are mitigated by the passage of time and
positive input from his supervisors and coworkers who have worked with him for many
years.     
Based on Applicant’s documented disclosures of most of the judgment and trust
lapses that have been attributed to Applicant, MC ¶ 17(d), “the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur,” has some application as well.  And Applicant may take some advantage of MC
17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”   
22
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily impose important duties of trust
and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those typically
imposed on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).   By
his actions demonstrated in these proceedings and over the course of his past 20 plus
years of employment in the defense industry, Applicant recognizes his trust
responsibilities.  
From a whole person standpoint, Applicant documents favorable assessments
from his supervisors, coworkers, and former colleagues, who know him and have
worked with him throughout his professional career in the defense industry. The
cumulative effects of past and recent judgment lapses are outweighed by the sum of his
prior disclosures and documented positive contributions to the defense industry over the
past 20 plus years. 
Based on a consideration of the applicable guidelines for personal conduct and a
whole person assessment, Applicant mitigates the personal conduct specifically
associated with his aged terminations, misstatements and omissions, and more recent
non-disclosure of his Czech citizenship to appropriate personnel in a timely way. Taking
into account all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record, favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by the personal conduct
guideline.  
The remaining allegation covered by the personal conduct guideline
(subparagraph 3.a) was disputed by Applicant and not substantiated by the evidence
presented in the record.  This allegation is mitigated for lack of substantiating proof.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.b: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.c: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.d: Against Applicant
23
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a: For Applicant
Subpara. 2.b: For Applicant
Subpara. 2.c: For Applicant
Subpara. 2.d: For Applicant
Subpara. 2.e: For Applicant
Subpara. 2.f: For applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 3.a: For Applicant 
Subpara. 3.b: For Applicant
Subpara. 3.c: For Applicant
Subpara. 3.d: For Applicant
Subpara. 3.e: For Applicant
Subpara. 3.f: For applicant
Subpara. 3.g: For applicant
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
24
