KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline G
DIGEST: The Judge’s weighing of the evidence was not arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to
law.  The Judge did not exceed her authority to draw reasonable inferences from the record. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-05093.a1
DATE: 01/15/2010
DATE: January 15, 2010
In Re:
-----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-05093
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 24, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
The Judge resolved the Guideline G concerns in Applicant’s favor.  Therefore, they are not at issue in this1
appeal.  
“A: I informed [FSO] that I omitted some information . . . and she said keep all your documentation, keep the2
credit reports because you will be contacted . . . Q: . . . And you don’t have any sort of statement from your FSO to
confirm this conversation that you had with her, is that right?  A: . . . [S]he cannot recall the conversation . . .”   Tr. at
116 - 121.  
2
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October
21, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge mis-weighed the record
evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.   Finding no error, we affirm.1
The Judge found that Applicant is a network engineer employed by a Defense contractor.
He had several delinquent credit card debts.  Applicant also had judgements against him due to his
failure to pay fines, costs, and administrative surcharges resulting from several offenses over the
course of twenty years.  These offenses included operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol,
driving under a suspended license, etc.  Additionally, and also as a consequence of his numerous
offenses, Applicant’s driver’s license had been suspended.  The periods of suspension were as
follows: (1) October 1984 to April 1985; (2) November 1985 to February 2004; and (3) February
2005 to February 2007.  
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not disclose several
of his debts that had been delinquent more than 180 days.  In the Analysis portion of the decision,
the Judge concluded that, in light of the entire record, Applicant’s omissions were deliberate.  “A
good-faith effort to comply would require at a minimum that he disclose generally that he had fallen
seriously past due on credit card balances within the past seven years and that he owed surcharges
to state X that continued to mount because of his history of late payments.”  Decision at 12.   
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider the extent to which he is paying down his
debts.  Applicant also contends that the Judge extended too much weight to evidence that he took
an overseas trip though in debt, that he has acquired new debts in the form of loans for an advanced
degree, and that Applicant’s security manager did not recall being advised of omissions on the SCA.2
We have examined these contentions in light of the record.  
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (App. Bd. May 23,
2008). In this case, the Judge explicitly considered Applicant’s repayment efforts, but she further
explained why these efforts were not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns.  For
3
example, she noted that Applicant has acquired new credit card debt, thereby undermining his claim
of operating on a cash basis.  Regarding Applicant’s other contentions, we conclude that the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 06-21819 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2009) (A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law).  Also, the Judge did not exceed her authority to draw reasonable
inferences from the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05434 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2009).  
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision
at 15.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
