 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-06315 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline G 
(Alcohol Consumption). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 19, 2007. On April 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 13, 2009. Applicant 
answered the SOR in writing on April 30, 2009, and elected to have his case decided at 
a hearing. DOHA received his response to the SOR on May 4, 2009. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 14, 2009. On July 16, 2009, the case was 
assigned to me. On July 28, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the 
case for August 27, 2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through L, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his behalf. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 4, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations alleged, with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old draftsman IV, who has been employed by his current 
defense contractor employer since August 2008. GE 1, Tr. 21-23. Applicant has held a 
secret security clearance since April 2001. He seeks to retain his clearance, which is 
required as a condition of his employment. Tr. 29-32.  
 
Applicant did not graduate from high school, but was awarded a GED (date 
uncertain). He was awarded an Associate of Applied Science in Architecture and 
Construction Technology (Architecture) Degree in May 1999. GE 1, AE D, Tr. 27-29. 
Applicant married in September 2002. He has three stepdaughters, ages 28, 25, 23, 
and an eight-year-old daughter born during his marriage. GE 1, Tr. 23-27. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant has a history of episodic alcohol abuse, marked by five alcohol-related 
arrests spanning a 21-year period from May 1985 to September 2006. His arrests are 
summarized below: 
 
1. May 1985 – Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence 
(DUI). He recalls being stopped by the police and told that he was following too close 
with his bright lights on. When stopped, he admitted that he had been drinking. He 
passed the sobriety test, but failed the breathalyzer. He does not recall his blood alcohol 
content (BAC). He spent the night in jail and was released on his own recognizance. 
When he appeared for his court appearance, he was convicted of Driving While Ability 
Impaired, fined $300, ordered to perform 48 hours of community service, and sentenced 
to 30 days in jail, suspended. Tr. 34-35, GE 2, GE 3. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
2. October 1988 – Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. He was drinking at a 
local pub and was stopped by the police on the way home for speeding and for failure to 
stop at a stop signal. He was later cited for driving with no insurance. He failed the 
sobriety test. When he appeared for his court appearance, he was ordered to spend six 
months in jail, but was released after four months for good behavior. When queried 
about the length of his jail sentence, Applicant responded: 
 
Q. Were you – did you receive that heavy of a jail sentence because it 
was a second offense? 
 
A. I believe that in that instance, I was belligerent with the judge during 
sentencing. 
 
Q. Oh, okay. How were you belligerent with the judge? 
 
A. He asked me what I thought about this, and I frankly told him it’s a 
crock of (expletive deleted). And, he said, “Okay, you can spend six 
months and think about that.” Tr. 35-37, GE 2. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
3. December 1992 – Applicant was arrested and charged with larceny for taking beer 
from a liquor store. Applicant does not recall many details about this incident. He knew 
the owner of the liquor store, and claims he told the liquor store clerk he had a 12 pack 
of beer and would pay him the next day. The police were subsequently involved and 
Applicant spent the night in jail. To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, the charge was 
dropped after he paid the owner for the beer. Tr. 37-40. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
 
4. May 1995 – Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. He was drinking at a local 
pub and was stopped by the police for speeding when following a band member home 
at a high rate of speed. He failed the sobriety test. When he appeared for his court 
hearing, he was ordered to spend 30 days in an alcohol treatment facility. When queried 
about the arrest, Applicant responded: 
 
A. And, I remember this well because the police officer asked me to get 
out of the truck. And I told him, “No, I really don’t think you want me to.” 
And he said, “Yeah, we need you to step out of the truck.” And, I opened 
the door and basically poured out on the pavement.  
 
And he gave me roadside sobriety tests, and I failed miserably. I could 
hardly stand up at the time, if I remember correctly. Seemed like he invited 
every police officer on duty that night to come over and re-do the roadside 
sobriety tests in front of them so they could all get a good laugh. 
 
Ended up going to court over this, and I asked the judge at that time, I 
asked him, “Can I do some, some, in-house therapy instead of going to 
jail?” Because now I think I’m having an alcohol problem with this, you 
 
4 
 
 
know, seeing I had priors, and so the judge agreed to that. And, I did 30 
days inpatient treatment.  
 
Applicant remained sober “eight months, eight, nine months” after completing this 
treatment program. He resumed drinking because he thought he “could handle it.” He 
“ended up in detox shortly after that, probably 10, 12 months, I don’t remember how 
long. It could have been a year or two after that. And I remember I walked out of detox 
in the morning, and went to the nearest pub I could find, and it was closed.” He 
continued to drink after this incident, “but not to the same extent.” Tr. 40-44, GE 2. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
 
5. September 2006 – Applicant was charged with DUI, and convicted of Driving While 
Ability Impaired. He stated he began drinking following a disagreement with his wife 
about her “nagging” him to speak to his ill mother-in-law, who lived with them in their 
basement. He went for a drive to “chill out” and decided to get a package of cigarettes. 
At the location where he purchased the cigarettes, he hit someone when pulling out of 
the driveway and “that really pissed [him] off.” He decided to leave the scene of the 
accident and go home. He started drinking rum and decided to go back to the accident 
scene. After visiting the accident scene, he returned home and continued to drink rum. 
The police showed up at his door, and initially he denied being involved in the accident. 
 
When Applicant was sentenced in April 2007, he was ordered to complete Level 
II alcohol education and 86 hours of therapy at a state-certified agency no later than 
August 2008. He was further ordered to complete 24 hours of useful public service, 
refrain from consuming alcoholic beverages for the period of probation/treatment, pay a 
$200 supervision fee and court costs of $410, serve 150 days home detention with a 
report date in April 2007, and 30 days in jail (suspended). Additionally, following this 
incident, his state licensing agency revoked his driving privileges for two years because 
he had been convicted of a third alcohol-related offense. His driver’s license was 
reinstated in May 2008. Tr. 44-49, GE 2. 
 
The following is a colloquy between Department Counsel and the Applicant 
regarding Applicant’s current alcohol consumption: 
 
Q. Now, according to your answer, at the time you filed your 
answer, you had, you had resumed drinking again, is that correct? 
 
A. Yes. I mean, I stopped drinking once in a while. I can’t say that I 
totally stopped. You know, my drinking, you know, in my opinion it pretty 
much stopped. I mean, I only drink maybe three times a year, you know. I 
mean, since this last incident, I think I’ve drank four times. And, prior to 
that, it was far and few between. 
 
Q. Well, do you recall telling the OPM investigator back in January, 
2008 that your intention was not to drink at all again? 
 
 
5 
 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. And, so you’ve changed your mind since then? 
 
A. No, my intention is still the same. 
 
Q. Your intention is not to drink at all? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. But you do drink? 
 
A. Occasionally. I mean, I don’t – when I made that statement, “I 
don’t intend to drink again,” I don’t intend to ever let myself get out of 
control, you know, not to totally get blasted there, you know. I mean, I do 
believe a person can responsibly drink one or two and be considered 
actually not drinking. 
 
Q. Do you consider yourself an alcoholic? 
 
A. No, I don’t. In the past, yes. Not today. Tr. 49-50. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated the last time he had a drink was “[t]wo, three 
months ago.” Tr. 51. He also stated that he went to two AA meetings in the week before 
his hearing. Tr. 52. He added, “. . . I find it offensive, you know, that, that I’m here trying 
to defend myself.” Tr. 53.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Six character witnesses made statements on Applicant’s behalf to include family 
members and extended family members. Those who testified stated that during the 
limited times they observed Applicant, he drank responsibly or not at all. His wife did not 
testify at his hearing. She did submit a character letter, discussed infra. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application worksheet 
listing his September 2006 DUI charge, and stated that he revealed past DUI arrests on 
previous security clearance applications to show that he has a history of being 
forthright. Tr. 77-78, AE A, AE B. He submitted a copy of the DSM IV to show he does 
“not fall under the dependent or abusive categories.” Tr. 78-79, AE C. Applicant 
submitted a copy of his Associate of Applied Science Degree from a community college, 
discussed supra, as well as a Phi Theta Kappa Society certificate for scholastic 
achievement awarded in November 1996. AE D, AE E. He submitted employee time 
sheets from February 2006 to August 2009 reflecting steady employment and regular 
attendance. Tr. 80, AE F, AE G. He submitted a letter dated April 27, 2009 from the 
Director of the Level II Driving With Care Program reflecting enrollment in the program 
 
6 
 
 
on February 2, 2007 and completion of the program on April 8, 2008, discussed supra. 
AE H.  
 
Applicant submitted overtime authorization forms reflecting that he worked 
overtime at various times in 2006 and 2007. AE I. He submitted five work-related 
character reference letters. These letters collectively made positive reference to 
Applicant’s work ethic and trustworthiness. AE J. Applicant’s wife also submitted a letter 
stating she was unable to attend the hearing because she had to provide childcare for 
their youngest child and her two young grandchildren. She stated in her opinion as a 
college graduate majoring in psychology and after reviewing the DSM-IV, her husband 
“does not have substance abuse dependency or compulsivity concerning alcohol.” She 
also added that in the 13 years she has been with her husband, she has never 
observed him to be “belligerent, violent, confused or had a cognitive inability to 
understand.” AE K.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
7 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern concerning alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
 There are seven alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions listed under AG ¶¶ 
22(a) through 22(g): 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless, of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence;  
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
After reviewing the alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions supra, AG ¶ 
22(a), is applicable. Applicant’s five alcohol-related arrests from 1985 to 2006, 
spanning a 21-year are not in dispute and clearly warrant application of this 
disqualifying condition. The government produced substantial evidence supporting this 
disqualifying condition, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government.1 
 
 There are four alcohol consumption mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶¶ 
23(a) through 23(d):  
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
1See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
AG ¶ 20(a) does not define the sufficiency of the passage of time, and there is no 
“bright-line” definition of what constitutes “recent” conduct. Based on my evaluation of 
the record evidence as a whole,2 to include Applicant’s 21-year history of five alcohol- 
related incidents with the 2006 arrest finally being resolved as recently as 2008 when 
his driver’s license was reinstated, I am unable to apply AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully apply because Applicant does not fully acknowledge 
his issues of alcohol abuse. He has returned to drinking after completing the Level II 
Driving with Care Program.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant did not provide sufficient corroborating evidence 
suggesting he has overcome his problem. The evidence from his witnesses and his 
testimony that he exercises responsible alcohol use is of limited value absent evidence 
from qualified medical authority. The fallout from past misuse of alcohol should be 
evident to him. His history of alcohol-related incidents, current behavior of continuing to 
drink, and lack of evidence demonstrating that he has overcome his past misuse of 
alcohol, leaves me with doubts that his alcohol consumption problems are “unlikely to 
recur.” AG ¶¶ 23(c) and (d) are clearly inapplicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
  
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant told an OPM investigator in January 2008 that it was his intention not to 
drink alcohol again. Yet, at his hearing he stated that he last consumed alcohol “two, 
three months ago.” He submitted statements of positive work-related references, and 
personal references supporting the notion that he engages in responsible alcohol use. 
2See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 
4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). 
   
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
He has worked in the defense industry since at least March 2006 when he began 
working for his current defense contractor employer. However, his history suggests that 
he is unable to fully control or limit his alcohol consumption. 
 
Applicant’s lengthy history of alcohol abuse and the related problems that alcohol 
consumption has caused him and others leaves me with doubt regarding his eligibility to 
hold a security clearance. Particularly troubling is his return to drinking alcohol and his 
ambivalence towards drinking alcohol after his 2006 DUI arrest. His evidence presented 
and his assurances that his alcohol use is under control are insufficient to overcome his 
history. Applicant’s future involvement with AA remains unclear. While he is free to 
reject AA, he does not offer an alternative support system. Given his history, more is 
required to establish that his drinking problems are under control.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption and criminal conduct. 
The evidence leaves me with doubts as to his security eligibility and suitability.   
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the 
law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful 
consideration of the whole person factors”3 and supporting evidence, my application of 
the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my 
responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not 
eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
