KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his relatives in Iran.  He
also failed to demonstrate that the Judge was biased against him due to his Middle Eastern
heritage.  Prior decisions to grant a clearance do not undermine a subsequent denial.  Adverse
decision affirmed
CASENO: 08-03798.a1
DATE: 01/21/2010
DATE: January 21, 2010
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03798
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 24, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 22, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Darlene D.
Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him
due to his Iranian origin and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  Applicant was born in Iran.  He
served in the Iranian Navy for three months.  Subsequently he immigrated to the U.S. to attend
college.  He holds a Master’s degree in electrical engineering and is a systems engineer for a Defense
contractor.  He became a U.S. citizen in the early 1990s and has held a security clearance since the
late 1990s.  He is married to a U.S.-born citizen and has two children, both of whom were born in
the U.S.
Applicant has five siblings who are citizens of Iran.  Three of them are also residents of Iran.
He communicates with each of his family members one to three times a year.  Applicant enjoys an
excellent reputation for professionalism and job performance. 
Iran is engaged in efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction, supports international
terrorism, and has a poor human rights record.  It has no diplomatic relations with the U.S.
 In the Conclusions section of the decision, the Judge noted that Applicant has lived in the
U.S. for many years and has long held a security clearance.  However, she noted evidence of
Applicant’s affection and concern for his siblings and that he maintains regular contact with them.
The Judge concluded that these bonds of affection are a means through which Applicant might be
subjected to foreign coercion.  Accordingly, she concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the
security concerns in his case.
Regarding the claim of bias, Applicant contends that his record raises no security concerns
and that he is being unfairly singled out because of his Middle Eastern heritage.  He has provided
no support for this contention, other than his disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased and a party
seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden on persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
07-02253 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2008); ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).
In this case, Applicant has five close relatives who are citizens of Iran, three of whom are also
residents of that country, and with whom he communicates by telephone.  The Board notes the 2008
Department of State Human Rights Report on Iran, which is included in the Official Notice
documents.  Among other things, this document demonstrates that, during the year in question,
Iranian officials “monitored the social activities of citizens, entered homes and offices, monitored
telephone conversations and internet communications and opened mail without court authorization.”
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant’s relatives are a means through which Applicant
might come to the attention of the Iranian authorities.  The Board has long held that there is a rational
connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are adverse to the United
States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and safeguard classified information.  ISCR
Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002).  Accordingly, we conclude that Applicant has failed
to rebut the presumption that the Judge acted impartially.  
Applicant points out that he has held a security clearance for a number of years without
incident.  However, prior decisions to grant or retain a clearance do not undermine the legal
sufficiency of a Judge’s subsequent adverse decision.  “The government is not estopped from making
an adverse clearance decision when there were prior favorable adjudications.”  ISCR Case No. 07-
17383 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2009), quoting ISCR Case No. 03-04927 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 4, 2005).
Although Applicant has had no previous security infractions, the government need not wait until an
individual mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before it can make an unfavorable
security clearance decision.  ISCR Case No. 08-00435 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 22, 2009), citing Adams
v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  Applicant’s
good security record is evidence the Judge was bound to consider; however, it is not enough to
demonstrate mitigation as a matter of law.  
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with the national
interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant” is sustainable on this record.
Decision at 7.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
