                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-06792
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Attorney At Law
January 25, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire For Investigations Processing
on October 27, 2005.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On March 24, 2009, the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on May 12, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on July 8, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on July 13, 2009,
scheduling the hearing for August 19, 2009.  At the hearing the Government presented
four exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 to 4.  The Applicant called two
witnesses and presented twenty-three exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A
through W.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on August 26, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political conditions in Iraq.  After being assured
that the only information to be considered in the documentation was that concerning the
country of Iraq, Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 22).  The request and the attached
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 43 years of age and has a Bachelor Of
Science Degree in Architectural Engineering from a University in Iraq.  He is employed
as a Bi-cultural/Bilingual Advisor for a defense contractor.  He seeks a security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Iraq in 1966.  He grew up in Iraq, as a Kurd. He was
drafted and served four months in the mandatory Iraqi military before leaving to save his
life, and because he did not believe in the war.  From 1994 to October 1996, he worked
for an American based company in Iraq.  In 1996, the government of Iraq attacked the
city and the company the Applicant worked for.  At that point, the Iraqi government
considered the Applicant to be a spy for the United States.  With the help of the United
States company, the Applicant fled the country in 1996.  
In 1997, the Applicant came to the United States with his wife and infant
daughter, and made it their permanent home.  He quickly merged into the American
culture and society.  He became a naturalized United States citizen in 2005.  His wife,
became a naturalized United States citizen in 2006, and they now have three children
who are United States citizens, two of whom were born here.  
The Applicant has a number of family members who remain in Iraq.  His elderly
mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq.  He contacts her by telephone approximately
once every three or four months to see how she is doing.  He also has three brothers
and three sisters who are residents and citizens of Iraq.  He contacts his brothers about
three times a year to ask about their families.  Two of his brothers he has not seen since
1999 when he returned to Iraq for three weeks, following his father’s death.  The
remaining brother he saw with permission, during an official mission in 2006.  The
Applicant contacts his sisters in Iraq about once a year.  He last saw his sisters in Iraq
in 1999.  The only member of his family that works for the government is his middle
sister.  She works for a hospital in Iraq, as all hospitals are run by the government.
None of his family have asked him any questions about his job in the United States.  
3
The Applicant has a mother and father-in-law who are retired residents and
citizens of Iraq.  He has a sister and brother-in- law who are also residents and citizens
of Iraq.  He does not communicate with them at all, and last saw them in 1999.  The
Applicant fully understands that the interests of the United States come first, even if his
family in Iraq were jeopardized.  (Tr. p. 80).   
In October 2005, the Applicant started working for his current employer.  His job
is based in Iraq on a United States military base.  He reports on a daily basis to high
ranking military officers and understands his important responsibilities to the United
States.  The Applicant has never been approached by anyone questioning his job or
any situation or information adverse to the United States, or that would otherwise place
the security of the United States in jeopardy.  If he ever were approached in that
manner, he states that he would immediately report it to his superiors.  He currently
owns two houses in the United States, a checking and savings account, and a 401(k)
investment account.  
The Applicant has no assets of any kind in Iraq. Applicant supports no political
organizations and does not vote in Iraq.  He states that he, his wife or children will never
return to Iraq to live.
Two witnesses testified on behalf of the Applicant.  One, a past coworker and
friend, testified that he and his family regularly socialized with the Applicant and his
family.  The other, a past employer and friend, testified that he considers the Applicant
to be a man of excellent character.  
Numerous letters of recommendation from various high ranking military officers,
and diplomats, with whom the Applicant has worked, or is currently working, reflect all
very positive recommendations for security clearance.  The Applicant is said to have the
skills, perspective, intelligence and experience that have allowed him to successfully
fulfill the requirements of a delicate job that necessitates an understanding of security
concerns and the protection of sensitive information.  Working under the highest threat
of attack and espionage, the Applicant is trusted by these individuals to defend and
protect the interests of the United States.  He is considered a consistent good worker,
able to deal effectively with multiple complex tasks often under significant time
constraints and pressure.  He pays appropriate attention to detail, and takes pride in the
quality of his work.  Each of the individuals who have submitted letters on the
Applicant’s behalf have full faith in the Applicant’s trustworthiness, ethics, loyalty and
commitment to the interests of the United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A through I).
Applicant’s performance evaluations from April 206 through January 2009
indicate that he consistently exceeds work requirements in every category.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits J through O).  
Applicant has received Certificates of Appreciation for outstanding work for the
United States.  (Applicant’s Exhibits P, Q, U and V). 
Applicant has completed specialized training courses in his field to assist the
United States in its mission.  (Applicant’s Exhibits R and S).
4
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the Iraq.  With regard
to Iraq, in 2003, a United States led coalition removed Saddam Hussein and his
Ba’athist regime from power.  In March 2006, Iraq’s new government took office after
being freely elected by the Iraqi people.  However, violence continues to engulf the
country.  This violence has been fueled and perpetrated by Al Qaida terrorists, Sunni
insurgents, and Shiite militias and death squads.  The State Department has specifically
stated that: “The risk of terrorism directed against United States citizens and interests in
Iraq remains extremely high”.  Furthermore, the State Department has posted the
following warning: “Attacks against military and civilian targets through Iraq continue,
including in the International (or “Green”) Zone.  Targets include hotels, restaurants,
police stations, checkpoints, foreign diplomatic missions, and international organizations
and other locations with expatriate personnel. Such attacks can occur at any time.”
Kidnapings still occur: the most recent kidnaping of an American citizen occurred in
August 2007.  There are United States substantiated reports of human rights abuses,
including a “pervasive climate of violence; misappropriation of official authority by
sectarian, criminal and insurgent groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; disappearances;
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”    
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
5
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion; 
7.  (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information.  
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest;
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation;
8.  (d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are
approved by the cognizant security authority.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
6
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and her ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a susceptibility to foreign influence and has
foreign connections may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are
harmful to the interests of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign
passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to
place the interests of the United States paramount to that of another nation. The
Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance
holder to abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
7
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion and, 7(b)
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information applies.  
  
However, the Applicant has provided compelling evidence to show that the
following Mitigating Conditions also apply to this particular case, given his particular
background:  Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S., 8(b) There is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, 8(c) Contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation, and 8(d) the
foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or are approved by the
cognizant security authority also apply.
Although the Applicant has foreign family members who are residents and
citizens of Iraq, the Applicant is not close to them, and now has very little contact with
them whatsoever.  There is no evidence of a close bond or strong evidence of affection.
The Applicant’s deep and abiding ties are here in the United States.  His immediate
family reside in the United States.  All of his financial assets are in the United States.
He is an American citizen.  For the past thirteen years he has worked hard to establish
himself as a responsible, trustworthy, professional and loyal American citizen.  His wife
and children are all citizens and residents of the United States.  His unique employment
with the DOD, his assets, which include his homes, bank and retirement accounts are
all in the United States.  The Applicant has essentially cut all ties from Iraq when he
moved to the United States and made it his permanent home for the past thirteen years.
His relationship with his family in Iraq, tenuous though it is, does create a
heightened risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because terrorists in the
Middle East seek intelligence and are hostile to the United States’ interests.  Iraq is not
safe places for anyone, that much is true.  It is a war zone.  However, there is
substantial evidence that the Applicant behaved in a courageous and honorable way
during his tour of duty in Iraq.  Officers and diplomats from the military have submitted
glowing written statements discussing the Applicant’s activities in Iraq, his strong sense
of integrity, and specifically his ability to safeguard classified information in a combat
area.
8
  Applicant established application of Mitigating Conditions 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and
8(d).  Based on his relationships and depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States interest.  He has
lived in the United States since 1978 until his employment with the Department of
Defense in 2003.  The Applicant has been a naturalized American citizens since 2005.
His wife is a naturalized citizen and his children are native born Americans.  He owns a
two houses in the United States and has no financial interests of any kind in Iraq.  He
has limited contact with his family members living in Iraq, and there is no evidence that
he has connections or contact with anyone over there other than his family members.
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the facts set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole,
support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability,
candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
It is noted that the current political situation in Iraq elevates the cause for concern
in this case.  However, the evidence shows that the Applicant has no bond or affection
with any foreign country, or to any foreign individual, or to any foreign Government, in
any way that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion against the interests of the
United States.  Therefore, there is no possibility of foreign influence that exists that
could create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of classified
information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly,
I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.d.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.e.: For the Applicant
9
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
