 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08873 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire on March 17, 2008. On 
July 1, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations; Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 27, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
7, 2009. The case was assigned to me on October 16, 2009. On October 23, 2009, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for November 12, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The government offered ten exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 10 without objection. Applicant testified, and 
offered eight exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – H without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. The record was held open until November 30, 2009, to allow Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. He timely submitted a seven-page 
document that was admitted as AE I. Department Counsel’s response to AE I is marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The transcript was received on November 19, 2009. Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.g, 1.l, 1.m, 2.a, 2,b, 2.c, 2.e, and 4.a. He denies the SOR allegations in ¶¶1.b, 1.c, 
1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.o, 3.a, and 4.b. He initially denied SOR ¶ 2.d, but admitted the 
allegation at the beginning of the hearing. (SOR ¶ 2.d) 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old engineer with a Department of Defense contractor who 
seeks a security clearance.  He has been employed with his company since September 
2007. He earned a bachelor of science degree in ocean engineering in December 2003. 
This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He is single and has no children. 
(Tr at 6-7; Gov 1)   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that he had the following 
delinquent accounts: a $1,307 medical account, placed for collection in September 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 5 at 1); a $51 telephone account placed for collection in March 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 5; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 26, 30; Gov 5 at 2); a $61 debt owed to an 
apartment complex placed for collection in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 7; Gov 3 at 
1; Gov 4 at 26; Gov 5 at 2); a $39 medical account placed for collection in September 
2002 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 5; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 27; Gov 5 at 2); a $218 cable 
television account placed for collection in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 
1; Gov 4 at 27; Gov 5 at 2); and an $802 medical account placed for collection in 
September 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 25; Gov 5 at 2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $453 medical account placed for 
collection in September 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 4, 6; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 19, 31; 
Gov 5 at 2); a $3,743 student loan account placed for collection in September 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 2 at 10; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 23; Gov 5 at 2); a $2,839 student loan 
account placed for collection in September 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 2 at 10; Gov 3 at 2; 
Gov 4 at 24; Gov 5 at 2); a $609 credit card account that was charged off in October 
2007 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 2 at 2, 11; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 18); a $23 fitness gym account 
placed for collection in April 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 29); a $70 satellite 
television account placed for collection in March 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 2 at 5; Gov 4 at 
30); a $221 insurance account placed for collection in June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 2 at 
5, 11; Gov 4 at 30); and a $150 medical account placed for collection in September 
2007 (SOR ¶ 1.o Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 1).  
 
 
3 
 
 
On June 13, 2008, Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation. 
The debts alleged in the SOR were discussed during the interview. Applicant did not 
recall many of the accounts and indicated that he intended to investigate the accounts 
after the interview. (Gov 4 at 7-9) 
 
After graduating from college, Applicant testified that he experienced three 
periods of unemployment. On each occasion he was unemployed for several months. 
(Tr at 51) On his security clearance questionnaire, Applicant listed periods of 
unemployment from May 2000 to December 2003, when he was a college student and 
from August 1998 to September 1999. He did not list any periods of unemployment after 
graduation. (Gov 1, Section 11)    
 
Applicant provided proof that the following debts are paid:  SOR ¶ 1.b, $51 
telephone collection account, resolved on October 27, 2009 (AE D); SOR ¶ 1.e, $218 
cable television collection account, resolved on November 5, 2009 (AE B); SOR ¶ 1.l, 
$70 satellite television collection account, resolved on November 5, 2009 (AE I at 2); 
and SOR ¶ 1.m, $221 insurance account placed for collection, resolved on November 4, 
2009 (AE C).  
 
Applicant recently completed a loan rehabilitation program for the two delinquent 
student loan accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, $3,743 and 1.i, $2,839. He admits losing 
track of the two student loan accounts. The loans were transferred from the 
rehabilitation program in October 2009. (Tr at 32-44; AE E; AE F; AE G) He also 
rehabilitated some additional delinquent student loans that were not alleged in the SOR.  
(Gov 4 at 12-14; AE F; AE H at 2) He claims that all of his student loan accounts are 
now in good standing. He currently pays $50.31 a month towards the student loans 
alleged in the SOR.  He pays $108.57 a month towards the other student loans that he 
rehabilitated. He provided a statement, dated October 3, 2009, that indicated that he 
had not made his payment for September 2009, and was one month past due. (Tr at 32- 
44, 61-66; AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; Gov 4 at 12-14) 
 
The status of the remaining accounts alleged in the SOR are:  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g medical debts in the amounts of $1,307, $39, $802, 
$453: Applicant claims the debts all relate to treatment received at a medical center in 
2002. He believes that some of the accounts may be duplicates. He is in the process of 
arranging a payment plan. He intends to resolve these accounts as soon as he can, but 
no payment plan had been arranged at the close of the record.  The debts are 
unresolved. (Tr at 53-57) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $61 collection debt owed to an apartment complex: Applicant states 
this debt is from an apartment that he and a co-worker shared when he worked as a 
field engineer for a previous employer. He denies that he is responsible for the debt. He 
claims that his former employer is responsible for paying the debt. He claims he has 
been trying to contact the human resources department at his former employer to 
arrange to have them pay the debt. The debt is unresolved. (Tr at 58-60)  
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, $609 charged off credit card account: Applicant denies this account. 
He is not familiar with the account. He claims that he contacted the company and they 
were not aware of the account’s status and they do not have an account in his name. 
He did not dispute the account with the credit reporting agencies and provided no 
corroboration from the company that he does not have an account. The debt is 
unresolved. (Tr at 66-68) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k, $23 fitness account placed for collection: Applicant states that the 
account is from a gym that he belonged to several years ago. He claims he called the 
collection agency and they did not have an account in his name. He has no 
documentation to corroborate that he does not have an account. He has not disputed 
the account with the credit reporting agencies. The debt is unresolved. (Tr at 68-69) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o, $150 medical debt placed for collection: Applicant believes this debt 
is related to the medical bills incurred during treatment in 2002.  He admits the debt is 
unresolved. A credit report, dated April 3, 2008, shows that this debt was opened in 
April 2007, in the state where Applicant was residing at the time. In 2002, Applicant 
lived in another state. This debt is not related to Applicant’s medical treatment received 
in 2002. The debt is unresolved. (Tr at 71; Gov 2 at 3) 
 
Applicant is unaware of having any other delinquent accounts. (Tr at 72) He is 
current on his federal and state taxes. He has an extension for filing his state and 
federal taxes for tax year 2009. He is not sure when the extension expires. (Tr at 82) He 
testified that he had no credit cards other than a business credit card. He also testified 
that he paid off some of his debts using a credit card over the phone. Under cross 
examination, he admitted using his business credit card to pay off the personal 
expenses. He claimed that his supervisor gave him permission to use his business 
credit card to pay off some of his debts. (Tr at 77-79)   
 
Applicant’s current annual salary is $63,000. His net monthly income is $3,100. 
His monthly expenses include: $1,050 rent; $400 groceries; $150 utilities; car payment 
$405; student loans $400. Applicant has not driven his car for the past year, but recently 
opened a car insurance account which will be $150 monthly. He claims that he has 
between $300 to $400 left over each month after expenses. On the day of the hearing, 
he had $2,000 in his checking account. He has no savings. He claims that he used his 
pension funds to pay off debts. He has not attended financial counseling. (Tr at 73-83; 
see also Gov 4 at 3) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant answered, “no” in response to section 28 on his security clearance 
application, dated March 17, 2008, which asks applicants whether they have had any 
delinquent debts over 180 days with the past seven years, or are currently 90 days 
delinquent on any debts. He omitted the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.o.  Applicant 
claims that he did intend to deceive the government about his delinquent accounts. He 
 
5 
 
 
claims that he was unaware of his delinquent accounts. He was not diligent about 
keeping track of his bills. (Tr at 72-73) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he had four alcohol-related arrests 
between July 2, 2000, and October 28, 2006.  
 
On July 2, 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol, Failure to Maintain a Single Lane, and Driving While License 
Suspended.  Applicant was a waiter at a restaurant. He went out for a few drinks after 
work. He was driving home when the police pulled him over around 7:30 am. The police 
report indicates that people in another car called police after observing Applicant’s 
erratic driving. Applicant failed a field sobriety test. His blood alcohol content was .218 
and .222.  He was driving on a suspended license for failure to pay a fine or insurance. 
On January 19, 2001, Applicant pled guilty to Driving Under the Influence and Driving 
While License was Suspended or Revoked. He was sentenced to pay court costs of 
$341 and fined $500. He was given 12 months probation. He was required to attend 
DUI school; his driver’s license was suspended for nine months; and he was ordered to 
perform 75 hours community service. (Tr at 84-89; Gov 6; Gov 7)  
 
On May 7, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Disorderly 
Intoxication. Applicant went out drinking with a friend and his friend got into a fight. He 
and his friend were arrested. He thinks the charge was dismissed. The disposition of 
this charge is unknown. (Tr at 90-91; Gov 6 at 1) 
 
On December 13, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony battery. 
After a night out, Applicant got into a fight with his girlfriend. He hit her in the face 
ultimately breaking her nose. Applicant admits to drinking that night but claims he was 
not intoxicated. The police report states that Applicant’s girlfriend stated that he was 
extremely intoxicated. They got into an argument when his girlfriend asked him why he 
was always getting so drunk. Applicant got mad at her, told her to go home, and pushed 
her out of bed. Mutual pushing and shoving continued until Applicant hit her and her 
nose started bleeding. Applicant’s girlfriend stayed with him all weekend. She went to 
the hospital on Monday because her face was not getting better. Her nose was broken. 
On May 18, 2004, Applicant pled to the lesser offense of misdemeanor battery, and 
adjudication was withheld. Applicant was placed on 12 months probation. He was 
ordered to pay $1,035 restitution to his girlfriend. He attended anger management as 
part of his sentence. (Tr at 91-93; Gov 8);  
 
On August 11, 2006, a neighbor called the police around 4 am because they saw 
Applicant sleeping in his driveway. Applicant had been drinking that evening. He 
testified that he drank about a six-pack of beer. He went outside to call his girlfriend and 
fell asleep while talking to her on the phone. He was not arrested. (Tr at 94-95, 104; 
Gov 9) 
 
 
6 
 
 
On October 28, 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence. He was at a Halloween party and offered to drive some girls downtown. He 
was stopped by police and failed a field sobriety test. On April 6, 2007, he was found 
guilty of the offense and sentenced to community service, 12 months probation, ordered 
to attend a Mothers Against Drunk Driving seminar, and fined $500. (Tr at 95-96; Gov 
10 at 2) 
 
Applicant has not been arrested since October 28, 2006. He attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) classes in conjunction with each DUI sentence. He never attended AA 
on his own. He does not believe that he has a drinking problem. He believes he made 
some poor decisions when he was younger. He has never attended alcohol counseling 
or treatment. His drinking pattern is having a few beers with friends about once a week. 
He anticipates about six drinks would make him intoxicated. The last time he was 
intoxicated was at a Halloween party on October 31, 2009. He has not driven after 
consuming alcohol since his 2006 arrest. He has never experienced black outs. (Tr at 
100-103; Gov 4 at 6-7)  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related arrests alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, and 2.e were 
also alleged under criminal conduct. Applicant’s alleged intentional falsification of his 
security clearance application alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a is also alleged under criminal 
conduct. If the omission of his delinquent debts on his security clearance application is 
found to be intentional, his conduct would be a criminal violation of Title 18, United 
States Code, § 1001.  
 
Whole Person Factors 
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter on his behalf. Applicant has been assigned 
to his team for over a year. Applicant’s responsibilities include protecting a wide variety 
of controlled unclassified documents, business sensitive, and industry proprietary 
documents. He has performed responsibly and reliably in all of these assigned 
functions. The supervisor notes that Applicant has demonstrated he is a very 
professional member of the team. (AE A) Applicant was given an overall rating of 
“meets/occasionally exceeds expectations” in his 2009 annual performance appraisal. 
His appraisal indicated that he requires little oversight and is a self starter. Applicant has 
good work habits and is a team player. (AE I at 3-7)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
8 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. From 2002 to 2008, Applicant incurred 
14 delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $10,586.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept, 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. While 
Applicant provided proof that four of his debts with low balances were paid, the debts  
were paid between October 27, 2009, and November 5, 2009, a few weeks before his 
hearing. Some of the debts were paid with a credit card. His student loan accounts were 
recently rehabilitated. However, eight delinquent accounts remain unresolved. While 
Applicant has taken steps to demonstrate that he is financially responsible, concerns 
remain based on his eight-year history of ignoring delinquent accounts. His failure to 
develop a plan for resolving his remaining delinquent accounts continues to raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. While Applicant testified 
that he had three periods of unemployment after he graduated from college, he did not 
list any periods of unemployment on his security clearance application other than when 
he was a college student. Even if he encountered periods of unemployment, he has 
been employed in his current position since September 2007. He continued to incur 
delinquent accounts while in his current job. His payment of four debts with low 
balances appears to be a last minute gesture rather than a demonstration that he now 
behaves responsibly towards his debts. I cannot say that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. It was and is within his discretion to take control of his financial 
situation.  
 
 
9 
 
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. Eight 
delinquent debts remain unresolved. Given his past history of financial neglect, it is 
unlikely that his financial situation will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.e, 1.l, and 1.m. Applicant provided proof that these accounts were paid. The 
delinquent student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are found for Applicant because 
he provided proof that he rehabilitated the student loan accounts and they are now 
current. However the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.o are 
unresolved and Applicant has no plan as to how he intends to resolve these accounts. A 
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient to demonstrate a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue debts. He took no steps towards resolving his remaining eight delinquent 
accounts even though each debt’s balance is relatively low and within his means to 
resolve.   
 
FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) has the potential to apply with regard to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.j, and 
1.k because Applicant disputes that the debts are his responsibility. However, he 
provided no additional evidence to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provided 
evidence for actions taken to resolve the issue such as formally disputing the debts with 
the credit reporting agencies. FC MC ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
While Applicant’s recent payments of four of his debts and his recent 
rehabilitation of his delinquent student loan accounts provide some mitigation under 
financial considerations, it is not enough to overcome the concerns raised by Applicant’s 
eight-year history of financial irresponsibility. Applicant has not mitigated the concerns 
raised under Guideline F.    
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. The following disqualifying conditions are relevant to Applicant’s case: 
 
 
10 
 
 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) applies. 
From July 2000 to October 2006, Applicant was involved in five alcohol-related 
incidents. He has two DUI convictions, a disorderly conduct arrest, and a battery 
conviction which occurred after a night of consuming alcohol. Although he was not 
arrested, the police were called to his home in the early morning hours of August 11, 
2006, because concerned neighbors observed him passed out in his driveway.  
 
AC DC &22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the person is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent) applies. Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents indicate that 
he drinks alcohol to the point of impaired judgment. While the record evidence does not 
contain any formal diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence, Applicant’s 
alcohol-related incidents raise security concerns.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) ¶ 23(a) (so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. While Applicant 
testified that he no longer drinks and drives, he continues to consume alcohol to the 
point of intoxication. The last time he drank to the point of intoxication was on October 
31, 2009, at a Halloween party, less than two weeks before the hearing. While there is 
insufficient record evidence to conclude Applicant is an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent, his past history of demonstrated poor judgment while drinking alcohol raises 
a concern. The fact that he still drinks alcohol to the point of intoxication does not 
mitigate the concern. Applicant’s alcohol use still casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.    
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under alcohol 
consumption. Guideline G is found against Applicant.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
11 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 On his security clearance questionnaire dated March 17, 2008, Applicant 
answered, “No” in response to question 28a, “In the last 7 years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and 28b, “Are you currently 90 days delinquent on 
any debt(s)?” even though he had delinquent debts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.o. 
Applicant testified that he was unaware of his delinquent accounts when he completed 
the security clearance questionnaire. He was not deliberately trying to hide the fact that 
he had delinquent accounts from the government. He was just not diligent about 
keeping track of his bills. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) 
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) potentially applies to Applicant’s case. I find that it does not apply 
because Applicant did not intentionally falsify his security clearance questionnaire by 
omitting his delinquent accounts. I find Applicant’s testimony that he did not list the 
delinquent accounts because he was unaware of them to be credible. His inattention to 
detail is what created his financial problems. Guideline E is found for Applicant.  
  
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The SOR alleges four arrests and charges which were previously alleged under 
the alcohol consumption concern. There are several Criminal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions (CC DC) which apply to Applicant’s case, CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses) and CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted). As mentioned in the alcohol consumption section, above, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal offenses on four occasions from July 
2000 to August 2006. He has two DUI convictions, the first occurring in July 2000, and 
the second conviction in August 2006. He had a May 2004 arrest and charge of 
Disorderly Intoxication, the disposition of that offense is unknown. In December 2004, 
he was arrested and charged with felony battery after he broke his girlfriend’s nose 
during an argument. He pled to misdemeanor battery.  
 
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) are relevant to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
 
12 
 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and    
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement) apply. More than three years have passed since Applicant’s last arrest on 
October 28, 2006. He has had no further criminal violations. He currently has a good 
employment record. There is evidence of successful rehabilitation with regard to 
Applicant’s past criminal conduct.  
 
I find for Applicant with respect to the allegation in SOR ¶ 4.b which alleged 
criminal conduct because Applicant deliberately falsified his security clearance 
questionnaire by omitting his delinquent debts in response to section 28.  I found he did 
not intentionally falsify his security clearance questionnaire. As a result, there is no 
violation of Title 18 U.S.C. § 1001, a federal criminal statute.  
 
The Criminal Conduct concern is mitigated. 
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past history 
of alcohol-related offenses, financial irresponsibility, and criminal conduct. I considered 
the favorable comments of his supervisor and his favorable evaluation report. While 
Applicant rehabilitated his delinquent student loan accounts and resolved four of his 
accounts, eight debts remained unresolved. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that he was taking steps to resolve those accounts. The criminal 
 
13 
 
 
conduct concern is mitigated because Applicant has not been arrested and charged 
with a criminal offense in over three years. Alcohol conduct concerns are not mitigated 
because Applicant still drinks alcohol to the point of intoxication. The last time he drank 
to intoxication was less than two weeks before the hearing. His past history of alcohol-
related incidents and the fact that he continues to drink to intoxication does not mitigate 
the alcohol consumption concerns. He did not intentionally falsify his security clearance 
application when he omitted his delinquent accounts. Applicant’s history of financial 
irresponsibility and alcohol-related incidents raise serious issues about his ability to 
protect classified information. Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct concerns are 
found for Applicant. Financial Considerations and Alcohol Consumption are found 
against Applicant.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
14 
 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
       
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
