 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-03497 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations concerns but has not mitigated 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E, Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 7, 2009, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on November 5, 2009. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant did not object to the admission of the items attached to the 
FORM, and they are admitted. Applicant submitted a series of documents, which were 
marked AE A through F and admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me 
on January 7, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He held a clearance in the past, but it has lapsed. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, awarded in 1975. Applicant served on active duty as an officer in the 
United States Army from 1975 until he was honorably discharged in 1981. He served in 
the inactive reserve from 1981 until 1989. He is a disabled veteran and receives 
disability benefits. He married in 1976, and divorced in 1977. He married again in 1977, 
and is still married. He was separated for a number of years. His current status is 
unclear, but it appears he is separated. He has no children.1  
 
 Applicant’s mother had a stroke in 1993, followed by the onset of Alzheimer’s 
disease. His father developed cancer in 1998, and he also eventually became afflicted 
with Alzheimer’s. He lived with his parents during this period and was their primary 
caregiver. Applicant’s and his parents’ savings were depleted by the medical and other 
expenses incidental to their care. Applicant applied for credit cards in his own name and 
also co-signed for credit cards with his father. They used the cards until the cards 
reached their limit. They were unable to meet the payments, and several debts became 
delinquent. By 1998, Applicant’s mother required 24-hour care. They obtained 
caregivers who worked 24 hours by shifts. Applicant moved in with his wife, who he had 
been separated from since 1985. He stated that the caregivers would not work the 
midnight shift if he was living at his parents’ home. He continued to spend a lot of time 
at his parents’ house. His parents both passed away in 2005. His father was 89 when 
he passed away, and his mother was 86 at the time of her death.2   
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts and an unpaid judgment. Applicant 
admitted that at one point he owed the judgment for $24,507 and the delinquent debt of 
$19,815, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, but he provided documentation that the 
judgment was satisfied in December 2008, and the delinquent debt was paid in 
September 2009. He admitted owing the $11,610 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He stated 
that he is in contact with the collection company handling this debt and “will be working 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5; AE A. 
 
2 Items 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
out a payment arrangement with them to settle this debt.” He denied owing the 
remaining three debts.3    
 
 The debts that Applicant denied owing include a bank (SOR ¶ 1.b-$6,169), a 
collection company on behalf of the same bank (SOR ¶ 1.c-$8,190), and another 
financial institution for a credit card (SOR ¶ 1.d-$11,671). The two bad debts to the 
same bank alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are listed on a credit report obtained on April 
7, 2007. However, the entries indicate that the debts were purchased by another lender 
and show a zero balance. The credit report entry for the SOR ¶ 1.b debt shows 
Applicant as an authorized user. The entry for the SOR ¶ 1.c debt shows the debt as a 
joint account. The credit report also lists a separate entry for the SOR ¶ 1.c debt as 
collected by a collection company, with a balance of $8,190. The $11,671 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d is also listed on the 2007 credit report. It shows Applicant as an authorized 
user. Applicant disputed these three debts claiming they were his father’s debts. The 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c do not appear on later credit reports. The debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is listed on credit reports obtained in May 2009.4      
 
 Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in May 2008. He included a 
personal financial statement (PFS), which indicated he had a net monthly remainder 
(total net monthly income minus total net monthly expenses and debts) of minus $920. 
The listed net monthly remainder was not accurate as Applicant’s mortgage of $628 
was double counted under both monthly expenses and debts. Applicant stated that the 
PFS is no longer accurate. He stated in his response to the SOR that his net monthly 
remainder at that time was a positive $1,500, “which would provide for monthly 
payments on any remaining delinquent debts.”5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2007.  He answered “No” to Question 27d, which asked “In the last 7 years, have 
you had any judgments against you that have not been paid?” He also answered “No” to 
Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?”6  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he was 
unaware that a judgment was entered against him. Because he was not living at his 
father’s home, he did not always receive mail that was sent there. He stated that the 
default judgment to a collection company on behalf of a bank was entered against him 
in 2002.7 It is feasible that Applicant was unaware of the judgment. I find there is 
                                                          
3 Item 4; AE A-D. 
 
4 Items 4, 5-9; AE A. 
 
5 Items 4, 6. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
7 Items 4, 6; AE A. 
 
4 
 
insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally falsified the question 
about unpaid judgments. 
 
 Applicant admitted that the answers to Questions 28a and 28b were incorrect, 
but he denied that they were intentionally false: 
 
In the past, when I filled out and completed written SF-85 and SF-86 
Forms or other forms of security clearance applications for several job 
positions with other government contractors, some had asked for 
information only for the last 7 years on active accounts. That is why I had 
answered “NO” to several questions concerning my finances. I was 
assuming that the information being asked about was regarding current 
active accounts and not ones that were inactive or in collections.8 
 
After considering all the evidence, including Applicant’s age, education, and experience, 
as well as the questions themselves, I did not find Applicant’s explanations to be 
plausible. I find that he intentionally provided false answers to Questions 28a and 28b. 
 
 Applicant left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct in 
2006. He used the company’s information technology (IT) resources for personal use. 
He indicated that he had difficulty concentrating and maintaining focus at work because 
of the impact his parents’ deaths and the suicide of a co-worker had on him. He 
received counseling which helped him cope with his grief issues. There is no indication 
of any other similar conduct.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
8 Item 4. 
 
9 Items 4, 6; AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant satisfied the $24,507 judgment in December 2008, and the $19,815 
delinquent debt was paid in September 2009. He has not resolved another debt for 
more than $11,000. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant was the primary caregiver for two elderly, sick parents before they 
passed away in 2005. He incurred a number of debts to help pay for their care. Those 
are conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant was 
clearly responsible for two debts and a judgment, totaling $55,993. He paid the two 
largest debts, totaling $44,322. He is in contact with the collection company handling 
the $11,671 debt, and intends to work out a payment arrangement with them to settle 
the debt. I find that Applicant acted responsibly and initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
 
7 
 
his overdue creditors. There are clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. The 
2007 credit report does not list a balance due for the SOR ¶ 1.b debt, and it lists 
Applicant as an authorized user on the account. The debt does not appear on any credit 
reports after 2007. The SOR ¶ 1.c debt does not appear on any credit reports after 
2007. The 2007 credit report lists Applicant as an authorized user on the SOR ¶ 1.d 
account. Applicant established that he has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those 
debts.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 
8 
 
 Applicant left a job by mutual agreement in 2006, after he used the company’s IT 
resources for personal use. That behavior, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶ 16(c) is applicable. It is also 
conduct that could create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 
16(e) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in March 2007, when he failed to 
divulge his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as a disqualifying condition. There 
is insufficient evidence for a determination that he intentionally falsified the question 
about unpaid judgments. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant admittedly used his company’s IT resources for personal use. That 
behavior happened in 2006, shortly after he lost his parents and the death of a co-
worker by suicide. Applicant received counseling. There is no evidence of any similar 
incidents. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable to the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 
2.c.  
 
 
9 
 
Applicant has denied falsifying his SF 86. Those denials are not credible and are 
additional false statements. I find that no mitigating conditions are applicable to the 
intentional falsification of his SF 86.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
have considered Applicant’s service to this country as an Army officer and as a DoD 
contractor. His financial difficulties were related to his caring for his ill parents until they 
died. Those concerns are mitigated. He intentionally provided false information about 
his financial problems on his SF 86. Those concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations concerns, but has not mitigated 
Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant 
   
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
