                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06669 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant lacks a track record of financial responsibility, appears to be financially 
overextended, and does not have a viable plan to avoid similar financial problems in the 
future. He failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 29, 2008, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On August 11, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
4, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 14, 2009. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on October 6, 2009. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1, post-
hearing, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 14, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted with explanations all the SOR allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old lead plant protection officer employed by a defense 
contractor. He attended college from 1971 to 1972, but did not complete a degree. He 
served honorably in the U.S. Navy from 1984 to 1988, as a disbursing clerk. Applicant 
married his first wife in 1978 and they were divorced in 1981. He married his second 
wife in 1984 and they were divorced in 1999. He has two children of this relationship, a 
25-year-old daughter and a son, age 19. He provides some financial assistance for his 
daughter and he is paying $250 monthly (by garnishment of pay) in child support for his 
son. 
 
Applicant has been working for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 
October 1997. Under the sponsorship of his employer, Applicant has possessed a 
security clearance at the secret level for approximately 12 years. There is no evidence 
he has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. At his 
hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of his direct supervisor. Applicant’s 
supervisors and co-workers consider him to have an outstanding reputation and an 
impeccable work ethic. He is considered to be a patriotic American, trustworthy, and 
dedicated to his work and accomplishing his mission.  
 
Applicant has kept his supervisors and parents informed of his financial 
problems. His supervisor believes Applicant is doing all he can under the circumstances 
to resolve his financial problems. Applicant consistently volunteers to work overtime and 
during holidays to earn extra income to pay his debts. 
 
 
3 
 
 
In his January 2008 security clearance application, Applicant indicated that he 
had no debts that were over 180 days delinquent within the last seven years and/or 90 
days delinquent at the time he completed his application. He also indicated that in the 
last seven years he had not been a party to any public record civil court action, and had 
no unpaid judgments. His background investigation addressed his financial status and 
included the review of February 2008, August 2008, and February 2009 credit bureau 
reports (CBRs), numerous state court documents, and Applicant’s security clearance 
application.  
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent accounts, two of which are judgments, totaling 
approximately $27,000. All of his debts have been delinquent since 1999. He explained 
that the three debts were his ex-wife’s personal debts, which she acquired without his 
knowledge. When he divorced his wife in 1999, he was awarded the three debts as part 
of the marital property settlement agreement.  
 
Applicant testified he tried to pay the debts, but did not have the financial means 
to do so. His income was not sufficient to cover the debts and his day-to-day living 
expenses. In 2000, he tried to resolve the debts by filing for bankruptcy protection. He 
hired an attorney and completed some preliminary bankruptcy filings; however, he did 
not have the money to pay his attorney to complete the process. In 2001-2002, he 
underwent credit counseling and made some monthly payments pursuant to a debt 
consolidation agreement. However, he stopped making payments because, again, he 
lacked the financial means. Shortly thereafter, Applicant moved residences and lost 
contact with his creditors. Since then, Applicant has made no further effort to pay, settle, 
or resolve the three delinquent debts until 2008. In December 2008, Applicant contacted 
the creditor of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and was offered a structured settlement. 
He declined the settlement offer because he could not afford the monthly payments.  
 
In September 2009, Applicant retained the services of an attorney to help him 
resolve the three delinquent debts and to stop his son’s child support payments. 
Applicant seeks to stop the $250 child support garnishment of pay because his son is 
almost 20 years old. Applicant has asked his attorney to research his debts to 
determine the proper creditors and determine whether he is financially liable for the 
debts since some are too old. Applicant also has asked his parents for financial 
assistance. His mother promised to lend Applicant the money to pay off his creditors.   
 
Applicant earns approximately $38,000 a year. His take home pay is 
approximately $1,400 a month. In August 2009, he started receiving a $269 pension, 
which he will receive until he is paid a total of $26,000. His monthly expenses include 
$750 rent and an average of $600 in food expenses. Prior to receiving the $269 
pension, Applicant had only $50 of disposable income at the end of the month. He 
struggled financially, but his parents provided him with financial assistance whenever he 
needed it. In 2004, Applicant underwent vocal cord cancer surgery. Because he does 
not have insurance coverage, he has had to pay for his medications out of pocket. A 
review of Applicant’s CBRs shows he seems to be living within his financial means.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
 
1  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged three delinquent debts, including two judgments and one 
collection, which have been delinquent since approximately 1999. These are Applicant’s 
delinquent debts as established by the admitted CBRs and his testimony at the hearing.  
 
The delinquent debts were his ex-wife’s accounts which were awarded to 
Applicant in 1998-1999, as part of the marital property settlement agreement. Initially, 
Applicant attempted to resolve the debts through bankruptcy proceedings and credit 
consolidation but both failed. After 2001-2002, Applicant made no further effort to 
resolve his financial obligations until 2008. Based on Applicant’s testimony, he is 
struggling financially and does not have the financial means to pay his legal obligations, 
delinquent debts, and his day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations, apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant established circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his 
inability to pay his debts, i.e., his divorce and his limited earnings. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s evidence 
is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He presented no 
evidence of debt payments, contacts with creditors, and settlement or negotiations to 
resolve his SOR debts after 2002 until he received his SOR in 2008. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant is struggling financially and his financial problems are 
not under control. Applicant does not seem to have the financial means to resolve his 
financial predicament or to avoid similar financial problems in the future. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply because Applicant’s financial problems 
are not yet under control. He did show some effort to resolve his debts. However, his 
actions are not sufficient to fully raise the mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 20(f) is not 
relevant to this facts.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility by taking 
sufficient actions to resolve his debts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man and an 
outstanding worker. He is a patriotic, law abiding American, and a proud U.S. Navy 
veteran. He has worked well for government contractors and has held access to 
classified information for approximately 12 years. There is no evidence he has ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Applicant 
established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to 
pay his debts. These factors show some responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. 
 
 Nonetheless, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to fully mitigate the financial 
considerations concerns. He has limited earnings and seems to be struggling 
financially. He presented little documentary evidence of debt payments, contacts with 
creditors, and settlement or negotiations of debts from the time he acquired the debts in 
1999 to 2008 when he received the SOR. His favorable information fails to show 
financial responsibility and good judgment or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. His financial problems are not under control. He does not have a viable 
plan to avoid similar financial problems in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
