                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07851 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) for employment with a defense contractor on April 9, 2007. On May 21, 2009, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant detailing security concerns for personal conduct under Guideline E. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 23, 2009. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 10, 2009. Applicant admitted 
eight of the nine allegations of personal conduct under Guideline E with explanation. He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.   
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 28, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on September 21, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
October 7, 2009, for a hearing on October 19, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The government offered 12 exhibits, marked government exhibit (Gov. Ex.) 
1 through 12, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his behalf. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 6, 2009. Based on a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received a copy of the Notice of Hearing in the mail at his home. He 
could not remember the date the Notice of Hearing was received. He received a copy of 
the Notice of Hearing from his employer on October 18, 2009, the day before the 
hearing. Applicant is entitled to 15 days advance notice of the hearing (Directive 
E3.1.8). Applicant discussed with Department Counsel the hearing date of October 19, 
2009, prior to the Notice of Hearing being mailed so actual notice was given more than 
15 days prior to the hearing. However, Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing only 
one day prior to the hearing. At the hearing, Applicant waived the 15 days notice 
requirement (Tr. 4-5). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted all but one of the nine allegations 
under personal conduct. His admissions are considered in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old and has worked for his defense contractor employer for 
more than five years as a systems analyst. He served 14 years on active duty with the 
Army. He is married but has been separated from his wife since 1996. He presently 
lives with another woman. He has three children from his marriage and one with his 
girlfriend. The three children live with their mother, and the one child lives with him and 
his girlfriend (Tr. 31-33; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated April 9, 2007; Gov. Ex. 12, DD Form 
214, dated August 2008). 
 
The personal conduct offenses date from 1986, when he first entered active duty 
in the Army. The personal conduct offenses involve offenses arising from domestic 
disputes (SOR 1.b, 1.e, 1.g); the military offense of absence without leave (SOR 1.c, 
1.d), and disrespect to a noncommissioned officer (SOR 1.a); and traffic offenses (SOR 
1.f, 1.h, 1.i). 
 
Applicant received non-judicial punishment under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ) for disrespect to a noncommissioned officer in 1986 (SOR 1.a). 
Applicant was involved in a verbal confrontation with a noncommissioned officer shortly 
after arriving at his first duty station. He was on duty and was directed to sweep the 
barracks area. The charge of quarters directed him to sweep some debris away from a 
 
3 
 
 
door. Applicant did not like what the noncommissioned officer said and disrespectfully 
responded back to him. He was sentenced to forfeit pay, restricted to the company 
area, and directed to perform extra duty (Tr. 23-24; Gov. Ex. 10, DA Form 5248-R, 
Report of Unfavorable Information, dated July 14, 1986). 
 
Applicant received a reprimand from his unit commander for domestic violence in 
1990 (SOR 1.b). The military police were called to Applicant's quarters by Applicant's 
wife because he pushed her during a verbal confrontation. His unit commander took 
administrative action with a written reprimand (Tr. 20-23; Gov. Ex. 7, DA Form 4833, 
Commander's report of disciplinary or administrative action, dated February 13, 1990). 
 
Applicant received non-judicial punishment in 1997, for failure to report to his 
duty station (SOR 1.c). Applicant, now a sergeant, was the unit supply sergeant. 
Applicant said he was told by the first sergeant not to report to his work site until an 
issue involving him was resolved by the commander. The first sergeant stated he did 
not tell Applicant not to report to his place of duty. Applicant's commander imposed 
punishment for failure to go to his prescribed place of duty in violation of Article 86, 
UCMJ and imposed as punishment a forfeiture of $382 (Tr. 24-26, 37-40; Gov. Ex. 8, 
DA Form 5248-R, Report of unfavorable information, dated October 28, 1997). 
 
Applicant received non-judicial punishment for absence without authority in 1999 
(SOR 1.d). Applicant was granted emergency leave when his grandmother died. He 
went to Puerto Rico for the funeral. Applicant stated he was unable to return to his unit 
on time because of a hurricane. He could not call his unit for an extension of his leave 
because telephone service was disrupted by the hurricane. Applicant returned to his 
unit two days late. Since he had not requested an extension of his leave, Applicant was 
punished by his commander for absence without leave, and was sentenced to a 
suspended reduction in grade, a suspended forfeiture of $743 for two months, and extra 
duty (Tr. 26-27, 40-42; Gov. Ex. 9, DA Form 5248-R, Report of Unfavorable Information, 
dated May 20, 1999). 
 
Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged with domestic battery in August 
2001 (SOR 1.e). Applicant and his wife separated, and Applicant was living with his 
girlfriend and their child. She called the police charging him with domestic violence. The 
police arrested Applicant based on the word of the girlfriend, and he spent a night in jail. 
His girlfriend paid his release bond the next day. She changed her story concerning the 
assault, and the charge was not prosecuted by the local prosecutor (Tr. 18-19, 42-45; 
Gov. Ex. 3, Letter with court documents, dated August 25, 2008). 
 
Applicant admitted he was cited and fined for driving on a suspended license in 
2002 (SOR 1.f). Applicant did not realize his license had been suspended for failure to 
pay child support until he was stopped by the police. After separating from his wife, 
Applicant and his wife kept a joint checking account. Applicant's wife withdrew support 
funds from the account. She then withdrew all of the funds from the account, so 
Applicant had her name removed from the account. Applicant's wife filed for child 
support and she was awarded back support of $24,000 even though she had been 
 
4 
 
 
withdrawing funds from the account for over two years. Applicant's wife requested child 
support. She received court ordered monthly support of $1,000. Applicant was not 
present at the proceeding and did not know of the order. After his arrest, Applicant 
started making child support payments and his license was restored. He is current with 
his child support payments (Tr. 45-47).  
 
Applicant admitted he was arrested for trespassing and domestic violence in 
2004 (SOR 1.g). Applicant and his girlfriend, the same person involved in the incident at 
SOR 1.e, separated but he had visitation rights for their son. He called his girlfriend to 
inform her he was coming to her house to pick up the child for his visitation. She 
informed him it was fine. When he arrived, she would not release their son. His girlfriend 
called the police and he was arrested for domestic violence and first degree trespass. 
The domestic violence charge was dismissed and he was found guilty of trespass. His 
sentence was to stay away from his girlfriend. Applicant now knows if there is an issue 
on visitation to have a police officer accompany him to pick up the child for visitations 
(Tr. 18-20, 53-56; Gov. Ex. 6, Warrant, dated June 11, 2004). 
 
Applicant was arrested for driving on a suspended license, fleeing the scene of 
an accident, and traffic violation on a military installation in 2006 (SOR 1.h). Applicant's 
license was suspended, but he nonetheless drove his girlfriend's car to work. He was 
involved in an accident when another vehicle pulled in front of him causing a collision. 
The other driver was cited for causing the accident. Applicant fled the scene of the 
accident, and went to a nearby gas station to call his girlfriend and inform her of the 
accident. He later returned to the scene of the accident to learn his car had been towed 
and the military police were looking for him. He turned himself in to the military police. 
He was cited by military police for driving on a suspended license, fleeing the scene of 
the accident, and involvement in a traffic accident. Applicant paid a fine and did not 
have to appear in court (Tr. 18-21, 48-52 Gov. Ex. 4, Military police report, dated June 
15, 2006). 
 
Applicant was apprehended in 2007, for failure to carry a driver's license with him 
(SOR 1.i). He did not have a valid license since there was a block on his license for two 
traffic citations he received in another state. He paid the fines in the other state, and 
now has a valid license (Tr. 53-54; Gov. Ex. 5, Citation, dated August 17, 2007).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information (AG ¶ 15). Applicant's multiple arrests and convictions for military offenses, 
domestic violence, and traffic and driving offenses raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative 
issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, support a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness 
to comply with rules or regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information); PC DC AG 16(d) (credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which when combined with all 
 
6 
 
 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules or 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information); and PC DC AG 16(e) (personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities, which, if known 
may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing . . ).  While none 
of the offenses charged are by themselves serious, there are multiple lesser offenses to 
be considered as a whole. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under personal conduct. 
Applicant raised by his testimony Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) AG 
¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); PC MC AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur); PC MC AG ¶ 17(e) (the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress); PC MC AG ¶ 17(f) (the information was unsubstantiated or 
from a source of questionable reliability); and PC MC AG ¶ 17(g) (association with 
person involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that do 
not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness 
to comply with rules and regulations).   
 
There was a pattern of disciplinary problems amounting to inappropriate personal 
conduct when Applicant was in the Army. He received non-judicial punishment for 
disrespect to a noncommissioned officer, and absence without leave. The offenses 
happened 10 to 20 years ago and were strictly military-related offenses. Since Applicant 
is no longer in the military, this conduct is unlikely to recur. The conduct does not now 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment because he is now 
older and more mature and inclined to follow rules and regulations.  
 
There were three offenses of domestic violence with his wife or girlfriend. It does 
not appear he ever seriously struck either women, and the charges either received 
minor punishment or were not prosecuted. There is information that Applicant may not 
have committed the domestic assaults. He received only a reprimand from his 
commander for one incident, one was nolle prosequi, and the other was reduced to a 
trespass offense with only an order to stay away from the alleged victim. Applicant has 
shown that he understands now how to properly manage his relationships with his 
former wife and his girlfriend concerning visitation rights with his children. The traffic 
offenses were minor involving driving on a suspended license. Traffic or driving 
infractions can indicate a person's inability or unwillingness to comply with laws and 
regulations. Applicant did not know that his license was suspended for two of the 
incidents. The other incident he did know of the suspension and so he fled from the 
 
7 
 
 
scene of an accident to call his girlfriend and advise her of the accident. Knowingly 
driving on a suspended license is an error in judgment. However, there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation in that Applicant is gainfully employed, has not had a traffic-
related incident in over two years, and he expressed that he understands the need to 
comply with traffic and driving requirements. The offenses are minor, happened under 
unusual or unique circumstances that are no longer present, and are not likely to recur. 
Applicant has presented sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for personal 
conduct.  
  
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant's military 
offenses happened over ten years ago and will not recur since he is no longer in the 
military. The domestic violence incidents either did not occur, or happened under unique 
circumstances that are no longer present. The traffic citations are also minor and there 
is evidence of successful rehabilitation. Applicant's personal conduct, when considered 
as a whole, does not support a whole person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that he may not properly safeguard 
protected information. Overall, on balance, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
