 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within
the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-08155
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esq.
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant frequently consumed alcohol to excess during the three years he served
in the Air Force. He also used marijuana on a single occasion while he was in the Air
Force, which resulted in disciplinary action being taken against him and his receipt of a
General Discharge. He has not used marijuana since 2003, and he now consumes alcohol
responsibly and in moderation. Applicant has mitigated the security concern that was
created by his alcohol consumption and use of marijuana. Clearance is granted. 
On June 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) and
Guideline H (drug involvement). Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA
on July 24, 2009. Applicant admitted all allegations and requested a hearing. 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on September 9, 2009. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 8, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 27, 2009. The hearing was
conducted as scheduled. The government submitted three documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3 and admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant testified, called three witnesses to testify on his behalf, and he submitted a binder
containing nine tabs that was marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1, and admitted into the
record without objection. The transcript was received on November 12, 2009.     
Findings of Fact
After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 28-year-old single man who has been employed by a defense
contractor since March 2005. He was initially employed by the defense contractor as a field
engineer. However, his stellar work performance led to his promotion to senior systems
integration engineer, a position normally requiring the occupant to have a bachelor’s
degree, which Applicant does not possess.  
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1999. He worked as a clerk in a retail
store from May 1999, until he enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in January 2001. Applicant
served on active duty in the Air Force until he was discharged with a General Discharge
Under Honorable Conditions in August 2004. The basis for his discharge was misconduct
due to drug abuse. Applicant held a couple of short term jobs following his discharge until
he obtained his current employment.  
Applicant has deployed to combat areas with his current employer on three
occasions: May 2005 to May 2006; May 2007 to August 2007; and May 2008 to August
2008. His work responsibilities while deployed have frequently required him to travel by
helicopter and truck convoy to remote locations. As a result, Applicant has on multiple
times been exposed to small arms, mortar, and rocket fire. His specific duties sometimes
require him to place himself in positions that are exposed and particularly vulnerable to
small arms fire.   
Applicant’s supervisors testified and submitted affidavits on his behalf. They
consider him to be an excellent worker and dedicated employee who is a valuable asset
to his employer. He has earned their trust based on his reliability and integrity. They are
all aware of his history of using marijuana and abusing alcohol, and they are satisfied  that
he has matured significantly and that there is no likelihood that such misconduct will recur.
They have also socialized with Applicant on occasion and consider his current use of
alcohol to be responsible.
Applicant held a security clearance when he was in the Air Force and during his
overseas deployments with his current employer. While serving in combat areas, he had
daily access to highly classified information. There is no evidence to suggest that he ever
mishandled or risked the compromise of classified information, and no prior adverse action
has been taken to revoke or downgrade his clearance. 
3
Applicant first consumed alcohol when he was 16 years old and golfing with a friend.
He became intoxicated and he did not consume alcohol again until after he enlisted in the
Air Force. After he completed Air Force basic training, Applicant found himself in a living
environment where beer was readily available and frequently consumed by airmen.
Applicant was 20 years old when he began drinking beer in the Air Force. His consumption
increased to the point where he was drinking as many as 18 cans of beer a day. Several
times a month Applicant would drink beer before reporting for duty and he feels that he
was often alcohol-impaired when he reported for duty.
Applicant moved out of a barracks and into a house that he shared with two other
airmen in about 2003. Applicant’s roommates used marijuana on a more or less regular
basis. During a party at the residence Applicant used marijuana while he was intoxicated.
Applicant possessed a security clearance at the time he used the marijuana. He credibly
testified this was the only time in his life that he used marijuana. Sometime after the party,
someone reported to Air Force officials that marijuana was used at the party. Applicant was
questioned by investigators and admitted that he had used marijuana. He was disciplined
under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) by being reduced in rank
and forfeiting pay. He was also processed for an administrative discharge and he was
awarded a General Discharge Under Honorable Conditions. The basis for the discharge
was misconduct due to drug abuse. 
Applicant became concerned about his excessive use of alcohol and he voluntarily
enrolled in an Air Force alcohol and drug abuse program in February 2004. He attended
daily counseling sessions during the first two weeks of the program and once a month
sessions for the remainder of the program. Applicant successfully completed the program
in August 2004. Applicant also attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings during that time
period. He remained alcohol abstinent while in the program but resumed using alcohol after
he completed the program. 
Applicant describes his current use of alcohol as that of a social drinker. He
consumes as much as four beers on weekends and wine on occasion. Applicant remained
abstinent from alcohol, as required, when he was deployed overseas from May 2005 to
May 2006. As part of the current security clearance process, Applicant obtained a
substance abuse evaluation in December 2008. The evaluation, performed by a licensed
clinical social worker (LCSW) at a recognized substance abuse provider, concluded that
Applicant’s previous problem with alcohol was in full remission and that he did not need
treatment. 
Applicant submitted the testimony and report of a clinical psychologist at the
hearing. The psychologist administered a battery of psychological tests, reviewed a number
of reports, interviewed collateral witnesses, and conducted a clinical interview of Applicant.
He concluded that Applicant “appears to be free of any significant psychological disorder,
including any abuse of or dependence on alcohol and any use at all of non-legal drugs.”
(AE 1, Tab H, p. 8) The psychologist’s diagnosis for Applicant was Alcohol Abuse in
Sustained Full Remission. (AE 1, Tab H, p. 8) He opined that Applicant’s alcohol and drug
abuse occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur, and he provided a favorable
prognosis for Applicant as to both alcohol and drug abuse.    
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
4
Applicant submitted a notarized statement in which he avers: 1) he has only used
marijuana once in his life; 2) he no longer associates with individuals who use marijuana;
3) he does not intend to use marijuana in the future or associate with persons who use
marijuana; 4) he understands that if he uses marijuana in the future his security clearance
will automatically be revoked; and 5) he will submit to random drug testing.
      
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial commonsense decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guideline G (alcohol consumption) and Guideline H (drug
involvement) with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions are most relevant in this
case. 
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
5
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness. (Adjudicative Guideline [AG] ¶ 21)  
Applicant consumed alcohol to excess from 2001 until 2004, while he served in the
Air Force. He frequently reported impaired for duty after consuming alcohol. He possessed
a security clearance during this time period. He eventually became concerned about his
abuse of alcohol and he referred himself to an alcohol abuse program. A clinical
psychologist provided a diagnosis for Applicant of Alcohol Abuse in Sustained Full
Remission.  The following Disqualifying Conditions (DC) apply: DC 22(b): alcohol-related
incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition,
or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent; DC 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent; and DC 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or
alcohol dependence.
Applicant’s abuse of alcohol occurred over the course of a few years when he was
away from home for the first time and serving with the Air Force in an environment where
alcohol appears to have regularly been abused by the airmen with whom Applicant worked
and resided. He recognized he had a problem with his abuse of alcohol and he referred
himself for treatment. He successfully completed the alcohol abuse program and he
attended AA meetings. He currently uses alcohol in a mature and responsible manner that
is consistent with a man of his age. 
Applicant remained abstinent from alcohol while he was in the treatment program
in 2004, and again for the year he was deployed overseas in a combat area. He submitted
an evaluation from a LCSW who is a staff member at a recognized substance abuse
provider that indicated Applicant’s alcohol abuse issues were in full remission. At the
hearing, Applicant provided the testimony and the report of a clinical psychologist who,
following a thorough examination and evaluation, concluded Applicant’s alcohol abuse
problem was in full and sustained remission and was unlikely to recur.
Considering Applicant’s age at the time he abused alcohol, his employment history
after he was discharged from the Air Force, the testimony of Applicant’s current
6
supervisors, the evaluations of the LCSW and the psychologist, and Applicant’s overall
testimony, appearance, and demeanor, I find the following Mitigating Conditions (MC)
apply: MC 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC 23(b):
the individual acknowledges his . . .  issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions
taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of . . . responsible use (if
an alcohol abuser); and MC 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated
a clear and established pattern on modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with
treatment recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous
or a similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized
alcohol treatment program.
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24
Applicant used marijuana on one occasion while he was in the Air Force and in
possession of a security clearance. DC 25(a): any drug abuse: DC 25(g): any illegal drug
use after being granted a security clearance apply.
Applicant only used marijuana one time and then only after he had become
intoxicated. It has been over six years since Applicant abused a controlled substance. He
no longer associates with the people who were present at the party where he used
marijuana or with anyone else who abuses controlled substances. Applicant successfully
completed an alcohol and drug abuse program after his one time use of marijuana and he
submitted an evaluation performed by a clinical psychologist who opines that Applicant is
unlikely to abuse alcohol or controlled substances in the future. Finally, Applicant has
agreed to submit to random drug testing with the automatic revocation of his security
clearance if he abuses a controlled substance in the future. 
The following mitigating conditions apply: MC 26(a): the behavior happened so long
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; MC 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; and MC 26(d):
satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited
to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
7
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded assessment of
a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information. The “whole
person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of his acts and
omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful
analysis. Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this
case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has
mitigated the security concern caused by his alcohol consumption and drug involvement.
He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his burden of persuasion. Guideline
G and Guideline H are decided for Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a-c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a-c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

