1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                   )       ISCR Case No. 08-05278
SSN:            )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 26, 2007.
On March 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
In an undated response received by DOHA on April 30, 2009, Applicant admitted
8 of 13 allegations under Guideline F and 4 of 6 allegations under Guideline E.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 28,
2009. Applicant received the FORM on June 8, 2009, but declined to respond to its
contents. On December 7, 2009, the Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for
assignment to an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on the same day.
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). Applicant failed to note information regarding her children on her      1
security clearance application.
 Item 6 at 2. Specifics regarding these and other incidents are vague.       2
 Id. Applicant provides no details regarding this lay off or potential lay-off.      3
 Id. at 2-3.      4
 W ith regards to her co-signing aid for her “sons,” Applicant noted they had “screwed me one to [sic] many      5
times and its not happen [sic] again.” Item 6 at 4. 
 Id. at 4.      6
 Id.      7
2
Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to
meet her burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old administration specialist who has worked for the same
defense contractor since September 2007. She has also been employed as a financial
aid advisor for a state university since 1999. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree
in business administration. Married, Applicant has “sent 3 kids to college [and] the last
one is still attending college in her second year.”  In choosing an administrative1
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. The facts she submitted
with regard to her financial situation are mostly derived from her response to the SOR
and her responses to DOHA Interrogatories. These narratives are comprised of
comments unsupported by documentary evidence. Because the information provided
was brief, the facts of record are scant.
Applicant was laid off from a job in 2004, resulting in a year-long period of
unemployment and the interruption of a debt consolidation repayment plan.  Two years2
later, she faced another lay-off.  During this time period, she co-signed on various3
accounts for one or more sons, which they neglected.  These included two car4
purchases and the acquisition of an apartment.  When Applicant was apprised that she5
had a number of delinquent accounts noted on her credit report, she stated that she
was unaware of the contents of her credit report and ultimately denied knowledge of
some of the accounts.  She implies, however, that some of the entries might be the6
result of identity theft because she lost her driver’s license and a military identification
card in 1999 or 2000.  7
When completing her security clearance application, Applicant denied having
been delinquent on any debts for over 180 days within the last 7 years. She did so
because she believed she had reactivated a repayment plan to address her outstanding
debts, thus placing them in active repayment. She was unaware that payments on this
 Id. at 6.      8
 Id.      9
 Response to the SOR at 3.      10
 Applicant claims in her Response to the SOR that this account was paid off, but failed to provide evidence      11
that this debt was satisfied.
 Applicant claims in her Response to the SOR that this amount represents the total owed by her son on      12
a car loan. She states that the sum is his responsibility, but concedes she was a co-signer on the loan.
 Id.      13
 Applicant claims in her Response to the SOR that this amount represents a sum owed by her son(s) for      14
an apartment for which she was a co-signer.
 Applicant simultaneously admits and denied knowledge of this account.      15
3
repayment plan had not been reinitiated when she started her present job.  For the8
same reason, she answered “no” to a question asking whether she was currently over
90 days delinquent on any debts. She also answered “no” to these questions because
she was “a little uneasy with putting all [her] personal information on the internet.”  9
On her security clearance application, Applicant denied she was charged or
convicted with a felony offense or, in the last seven years, with any other offense. She
admitted, however, that she was found guilty of theft by deception on January 29, 1996,
sentenced to a year in jail, two years of probation, and a fine of $371 for issuing two
bad checks. She maintains, however, that a relative living with her wrote the checks
without her permission.  She also admitted that she was charged with theft by10
deception in April 1991, but notes that it was due to an overdraft caused by mis-
communication between her husband and herself. She denied that she was charged
with theft of services/failure to pay a just debt in October 1991, and theft of services in
April 1992, but provided no evidence to support her claim. 
At issue in the SOR are 13 delinquent accounts, noted in SOR allegations ¶¶
1.a–1.m. Applicant admitted those allegations noted in ¶¶ 1.b ($1,070), 1.c ($1,042), 1.f
($203),  1.g ($16,876),  1.h ($11,073),  1.I ($162); 1.j ($1,980),  and 1.m ($48).11 12 13 14 15
Consequently, she admitted that she has about $32,500 in delinquent debt. She denies
the remaining financial allegations, but provides no evidence or explanation supporting
her denials. These debts amount to about $5,000. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      16
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      17
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      18
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      19
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      20
4
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and
commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” An administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is16
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion17
is on the applicant.  18
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security19
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any20
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
 Id.      21
5
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to21
deny an individual a security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an
applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a
clearance.
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) are
the most pertinent to the case. Applicable conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set
forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” It
also states that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” Here, Applicant admitted that she has at least
$32,500 in delinquent debt. While she denies responsibility for an additional sum total
of about $5,000 in debt, she provided no evidence that those debts are not hers or that
they have been formally disputed. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security
concerns.  
Although she failed to provide specific dates for any periods of unemployment,
Applicant repeatedly referenced at least one lay off in 2004 that affected her ability to
make timely payments on a debt repayment plan. Such a situation is sufficient to raise
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
Applicant’s delinquent debts are multiple in number and remain unpaid. She
admits to debt amounting to approximately $32,500. While she alludes to one or more
repayment plans, she failed to submit evidence of their existence, her payments on
such a plan or plans, or any other documentary evidence indicating she has attempted
to address the debts at issue. She similarly failed to present documentary evidence that
she has a scheme to address these debts in the near future or that she has received
any form of financial counseling. Therefore, neither Financial Considerations Mitigating
 It is unclear whether this is the job from which she was temporarily laid off. There is no evidence,      22
however, showing that she was ever totally without some income or forced to receive unemployment benefits.
There is only her statements that there was sufficient income to continue on a debt repayment plan. 
6
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), FC MC
AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts), nor FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control) applies.
Applicant currently holds two jobs, one of which is a state job she apparently has
held uninterrupted since 1999.  In the past two years, however, she apparently has22
held two jobs without interruption. There is no indication that during this period she
reinitiated repayment on her debt payment plan or sought out an alternative method for
addressing the debts at issue. There is no evidence that any of these debts have been
paid or disputed. With no evidence shown indicating some degree of progress on the
debts at issue, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Under Guideline E, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.” The guideline further notes that “any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the
security clearance process” is of special interest. Here, evidence was presented
suggesting Applicant was less than forthcoming with regard to her police record on her
security clearance application and indicating she falsified material facts regarding her
delinquent debts. 
There is no directl evidence that Applicant intentionally misled or deceived when
she denied having a police record. All the incidents at issue occurred over seven years
prior to her security clearance application certification and there is no evidence as to
whether she knew if her 1991 charge or 1996 conviction for theft by deception were
felony incidents. She did, however, know that she was under a debt repayment plan
when she was laid off in 2004, that payments under that plan ceased when she could
no longer make them, and that the repayment plan involved significantly overdue
accounts. Her decision not to acknowledge the existence of the repayment plan, if not
the accounts being addressed under that plan, clearly misrepresented her financial
situation. Consequently, Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a)
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities) applies.
7
Applicant completed her security clearance application in October 2007.
Although she failed to submit information as to what accounts were included in her
repayment plan or provide some indication as to the sum at issue, reference to the
accounts at issue indicate that her total liability for delinquent debts is quite high, nearly
$40,000. To date, she has yet to express a complete understanding of the true extent
of her debt or the contents of her credit report. Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition
(PC MC) ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) does not apply, nor does PC MC ¶ 16(e) (the individual has taken positive
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress). None
of the other mitigating conditions apply.¶¶ 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant is a mature woman who has worked two jobs simultaneously since at
least September 2007. While she demonstrated maternal concern in co-signing loans
with her sons, she ultimately became liable for their loans, leaving her liable for the
loans at issue. While she stated that she had a number of her debts included in a
repayment plan, she failed to submit a copy of that repayment plan and similarly failed
to provide a list of what debts were included under such a plan. Her lack of specificity
with regard to her period or periods of unemployment is as vague as her narrative
regarding the debts at issue. In these proceedings, the burden is squarely on the
Applicant to mitigate security concerns. By choosing an administrative determination in
8
lieu of a hearing, she chose to rely on a scant record virtually devoid of documentary
evidence supporting her assertions. Consequently, financial considerations security
concerns remain unmitigated. Due to a similar lack of documentation, personal conduct
security concerns remain unmitigated.
There are no facts bringing Applicant’s loyalty to the United States into question.
Her reliance on a less than comprehensive written record, however, leaves significant
questions unresolved. I conclude it is not clearly consistent with national security to
grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
