1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-09732 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F 
and E, Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 13, 2009. It was unclear from his 
response whether he wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. At his hearing, Applicant verified that 
2 
he wanted a hearing. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2009. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 30, 2009, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on November 3, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, 
which were received without objection. A stipulation to the admissibility of GE 1 through 
7 was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were received without objection. One 
witness testified. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted AE D, which was admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memo is marked HE II. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on November 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 2008. He has a bachelor’s degree and an associate’s 
degree. He has been married for more than 25 years and has a 14-year-old child.1 
 
 The SOR lists four delinquent debts totaling about $36,749, and a mortgage that 
was in foreclosure with a balance of $275,095. Applicant admitted that he owed all the 
delinquent debts but stated that he had filed bankruptcy.2  
 
 Applicant graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree in 1972. He realized 
that further education in a scientific field would provide him with more opportunities, and 
he went back to school and earned an associate’s degree in 1978. He was steadily 
employed as a computer programmer for many years and had no financial issues. He 
accepted a job in 1999, and he and his family moved to another state. He was laid-off 
from that job in June 2001, which started an extended period of unemployment and 
underemployment. He remained unemployed until he obtained a job in January 2002. 
Additional periods of unemployment included from November 2006 to February 2007, 
September to December 2007, and March to June 2008. Applicant took jobs at below 
the level of his education and experience, including delivering pizza. His current job is in 
data entry, which carries a much lesser salary than his previous positions as a computer 
programmer.3  
 
 Applicant was unable to maintain payments on his debts during his periods of 
unemployment and underemployment, and a number of debts became delinquent. He 
would contact the creditors and attempt to catch-up while he was working. He would 
then fall behind again when he became unemployed. He was sued by one creditor who 
obtained a judgment of about $13,000 in April 2007. Applicant eventually lost his house 
to foreclosure. His wife lost her job in September 2009.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 33-35; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-29, 33-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-28, 37-46, 70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
3 
 Applicant believed his only recourse was to file bankruptcy. He was unable to 
pay a bankruptcy attorney for a period. He found a legal document preparation 
company that does not provide legal representation but provides assistance in the 
preparation of court documents. He paid the company $600 for their services and filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2009. Under Schedule F – Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Nonpriority Claims he listed 14 creditors and debts totaling $71,745. There were no 
secured or priority debts listed under the relevant schedules. The court has not yet 
approved the bankruptcy. Applicant received counseling pursuant to his bankruptcy. 
Applicant and his wife have adjusted to him making a smaller salary. They have a 
simple lifestyle and will be able to pay their current debts once the bankruptcy court 
discharges their debts.5  
 
 Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) on June 4, 
2008. He answered “No” to Questions 19 and 20, which asked “In the last 7 years, have 
you, or a company over which you exercised some control, filed for bankruptcy, been 
declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or had a legal judgement rendered against 
you for a debt?” and “Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial 
obligation? (Include loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal 
Government.)” Applicant fully discussed his finances and delinquent debts when he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in August 2008. He responded truthfully to 
DOHA interrogatories in December 2008 and March 2009. He was open and candid 
about his finances at his hearing. Applicant denied intending to mislead the government 
about his finances. He credibly testified that he did not know the one debt was reduced 
to a judgment. Because he was continuously attempting to catch-up with his delinquent 
debts when he was working, it was unclear in his mind if he had ever been 180 days 
delinquent on his debts.6 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not 
intentionally falsify his SF 85P.  
 
 Applicant submitted numerous character letters. He is praised by all for his 
complete honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness.7 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 29-31, 50-51, 57; GE 3; AE C, D.  
 
6 Tr. at 52-54, 58-66; GE 1-4.  
7 AE A. 
 
4 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18:   
   
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
5 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(a) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, but the court has not yet granted the 
discharge of his debts. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable at this time.  
 
 Applicant had stable employment as a computer programmer and was financially 
sound for many years. In 1999, he accepted a new job, and his family relocated to 
another state. His finances remained in order until he was laid-off from that job in 2001. 
That started an extensive period of unemployment and underemployment from which he 
has still not completely recovered. Those are conditions that were largely beyond his 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant fell behind on his debts when he was 
unemployed and then attempted to catch-up when he obtained a job. The debts 
6 
became too much to handle and he took his only recourse, which was bankruptcy. He 
received financial counseling pursuant to his bankruptcy. His debts have not yet been 
discharged, but the bankruptcy is sufficiently advanced that there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved. Applicant receives partial consideration under AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(c). His actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [public trust position] process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the [public trust position] process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant submitted inaccurate information on his SF 85P, but as discussed 
above, it was not an intentional falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
7 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 59 years old. He had a successful career as a computer programmer for 
many years and he was financially stable. An extended period of unemployment and 
underemployment devastated his finances. He fell behind on his payments and then 
attempted to catch-up when he obtained a job. He became overwhelmed and took his 
only recourse, which was bankruptcy. His debts have not yet been discharged, but I am 
convinced that Applicant is on the right track. He has adjusted his lifestyle to a lower 
income. Additional financial problems are unlikely. As discussed above, relying on 
bankruptcy does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. However, Applicant exhausted all other resources before 
resorting to this legal avenue. He attempted to pay his debts and accepted a menial job 
before he finally accepted bankruptcy as a means to start over. If the debts are 
discharged, the risk of him having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds and his 
potential vulnerability to financial inducements are greatly reduced or eliminated. 
Applicant’s finances are not perfect. But the issue is not whether Applicant has unpaid 
debts; the issue is whether his debts make him an unacceptable risk. I find they do not. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
