                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09224 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) listed 21 delinquent debts totaling 
$19,859, and two criminal offenses. The two criminal offenses are mitigated. He failed 
to make sufficient effort to resolve his delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 4). 
On June 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified; and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and J (criminal conduct) (Item 1). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (Item 1). 
 
On July 8, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated September 16, 2009, was provided 
to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the 13 debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 
1.g, 1.i to 1.k, 1.m, and 1.r to 1.u, totaling $14,670 (Item 2). He denied the remainder of 
the delinquent debts (Item 2). He admitted the criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 2.a, and 
denied the criminal conduct in SOR ¶ 2.b (Item 2). His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor.3 In 1990, he 
graduated from high school. From March 2000 to February 2004 and from March 2004 
to November 2006, he worked for defense contractors in the area of information 
technology. He was unemployed from December 2006 to September 2007. In October 
2007, he began working for a defense contractor in the area of information technology. 
In 1994, he married his spouse. His twin daughters were born in 2001, and his stepson 
was born in 1993. He has never served in the U.S. military.  
 
Applicant did not disclose any unpaid judgments, unpaid liens, garnishments, 
illegal drug use, or alcohol-related offenses on his March 28, 2008, security clearance 
application. He disclosed an arrest for theft in November 2007, and a delinquent student 
loan for $2,500 that was incurred in approximately July 2004.    
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR listed 21 delinquent debts totaling $19,859 as follows: ¶ 1.a 
(store debt—$76); ¶ 1.b (store debt—$84); ¶ 1.c (collection account—$529); ¶ 1.d 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated September 18, 2009; and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
October 14, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to 
submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
3Unless stated otherwise, the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph are from Applicant’s 
March 28, 2008, security clearance application (Item 4). 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(collection account—$268); ¶ 1.e (collection account—$152); ¶ 1.f (medical debt—$51); 
¶ 1.g (collection account—$196); ¶ 1.h (medical debt—$20); ¶ 1.i (collection account—
$218); ¶ 1.j (bank account—$569); ¶ 1.k (collection account—$2,348); ¶ 1.l (collection 
account—$616); ¶ 1.m (collection account—$8,513); ¶ 1.n (medical debt—$2,956); ¶ 
1.o (collection account—$1,135); ¶ 1.p (collection account—$218); ¶ 1.q (collection 
account—$84); ¶ 1.r (collection account—$200); ¶ 1.s (collection account—$1,156); ¶ 
1.t (collection account—$120); and ¶ 1.u (collection account—$350) (Item 1). SOR ¶ 1.v 
also alleges Applicant was arrested in about November 2006 and charged with uttering 
worthless checks (Item 1).  
 
Applicant said he opened three student loans in the 2002 to 2003 timeframe.4 
The accounts became delinquent in 2003 for about six months. He continued making 
payments until 2007, when his student loan account again became delinquent because 
of his unemployment. He paid off the $4,900 balance in April 2008 using an income tax 
refund. He was employed from October 2007 to the present (Item 4). By January 2009, 
he said he had paid off about $1,000 in non-student loan debts (Item 5). In January 
2009, he said he believed he could pay off all of his debts in the next 24 months (Item 
5).  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($76) and 1.j ($569)—UNRESOLVED. DOHA did not ask Applicant 
to address these two debts in their interrogatories (Item 5). In his SOR response, he 
admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.j and denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a (Item 4). He did not 
provide proof of any payments or other resolution of either of these two debts.  The debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.j is established as a delinquent debt, and the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is not 
established. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b ($84)—UNRESOLVED. On January 8, 2009, Applicant admitted this 
debt resulted from a check Applicant’s father wrote to him as payee (Item 5). He did not 
indicate he paid for the bad check, and he denied the debt in his SOR response (Item 
4). There is insufficient evidence to establish Applicant’s responsibility for this debt. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($529), 1.g ($196), 1.i ($218), 1.p ($218), and 1.q ($84)—
UNRESOLVED. These five debts are owed to the same creditor. On January 8, 2009, 
Applicant said he had not paid anything on these “four” accounts because he could not 
afford to make payments (Item 5). In his SOR response he admitted the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, and 1.i, and denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q (Item 4). He did not 
provide any evidence of attempts to resolve these debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
($529), 1.g ($196), 1.i ($218), and 1.q ($84) are established as Applicant’s delinquent 
debts. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.p ($218) duplicates the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
4Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on May 22, 2008 (Item 6) is the 
source for the information in this section, unless stated otherwise. However, his March 28, 2008, security 
clearance application is inconsistent with his OPM interview. His security clearance application indicated 
he incurred a $2,500 student loan in approximately July 2004 (Item 4). According to his security clearance 
application, this was his only delinquent debt meeting the report requirements of being 180-days 
delinquent in the last seven years, or 90-days currently delinquent (Item 4). The SOR did not allege that 
Applicant falsified his security clearance application, and I apply no adverse inference against Applicant 
because of omissions on his security clearance application.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($268), 1.e ($152), 1.f ($51), 1.h ($20), 1.l ($616/$708), and 1.n 
($2,956)—UNRESOLVED. On January 8, 2009, Applicant said he did not remember 
these accounts, and requested a credit report to validate them (Item 5). In his SOR 
response he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f; and he denied the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.l and 1.n (Item 4). He did not provide any evidence of attempts to 
dispute, pay, or otherwise resolve these debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f 
are established as Applicant’s delinquent debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.l and 1.n 
are not established as Applicant’s delinquent debts. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,348)—UNRESOLVED. On January 8, 2009, Applicant said he 
had paid $50 a month for the last year, and the current balance was $1,950 (Item 5). He 
admitted the debt in his SOR response (Item 4). However, he did not provide 
documentary proof of any payments made in the last two years, such as an account 
statement from the creditor or his bank account statements. There is insufficient 
evidence of an established payment plan because of the absence of such readily 
available supporting documentation.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.m ($8,513)—UNRESOLVED. On January 8, 2009, Applicant said this 
debt resulted from a repossessed vehicle, and the current balance was $7,151 (Item 5). 
He admitted the debt in his SOR response (Item 4). He did not provide proof of any 
payments made in the last two years, such as an account statement from the creditor or 
his bank account statements. However, he did list $100 monthly payments to his 
creditor on his personal financial statement (PFS) (Item 5). There is insufficient 
evidence of an established payment plan because of the absence of such readily 
available supporting documentation.    
 
SOR ¶ 1.o ($1,135)—UNRESOLVED. On January 8, 2009, Applicant said this 
debt resulted from his father’s checking account (Item 5). His father died and Applicant 
was listed as the payee on the account (Item 5). He said he disputed the debt with the 
credit reporting company (Item 5). He denied the debt in his SOR response (Item 4). He 
did not provide proof of any payments made, or documents showing the dispute.5  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.r ($200), 1.s ($1,156), 1.t ($120), and 1.u ($350)—UNRESOLVED. 
These four debts are owed to the same creditor. On January 8, 2009, Applicant said he 
had not paid anything on these four accounts because he could not afford to make 
payments (Item 5). In his SOR response he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.r to 1.u. 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.r to 1.u are established as Applicant’s delinquent debts. He did 
not provide any evidence of attempts to resolve these debts.   
 
Applicant and his spouse’s net monthly pay is about $2,658 (Item 5). His monthly 
expenses are about $1,500. His PFS indicates the following monthly payments: $600 
(mortgage), $200 (vehicle loan), and $100 (SOR ¶ 1.m), leaving about $258 a month to 
address his other debts (Item 5). (Applicant told the OPM investigator on May 28, 2008, 
 
5 Presumably, Applicant inherited the account from his father, and the account was overdrawn. 
There is insufficient evidence of record to establish his responsibility for this debt. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
that he was making $200 a month payments on the SOR ¶ 1.m account, which had a 
balance of about $4,500). Applicant did not provide any documents showing his 
communications with his SOR creditors concerning his efforts to pay, establish payment 
plans, or otherwise resolve his delinquent SOR debts.6    
 
Criminal Conduct7 
 
Applicant admitted he was charged with theft of a motor vehicle in November 
2006 (SOR ¶ 2.a; Item 1; Item 5, Item 6). Applicant left his used vehicle at a car 
dealership and took the dealership vehicle to his residence. The dealership called the 
police. The next day, the police arrested Applicant at his home, and Applicant was held 
in jail for five days pending payment of his bond. The prosecutor agreed to defer 
adjudication for one year, and after the year elapsed, the charge was dismissed.   
 
Applicant told an OPM investigator he was charged in 1999 or 2000 with writing a 
worthless check (SOR ¶ 2.b). He received a fine of about $150. He denied to the OPM 
investigator and in his SOR response that he had an arrest for writing worthless checks 
in November 2006. An FBI records check indicated he was charged in November 2006 
with writing worthless checks; however, the FBI record does not include a disposition for 
either of the criminal offenses (Item 10). The FBI record includes the caveat that 
deciding officials “should not deny the license or employment based on the information 
in the record until the applicant has been afforded a reasonable time to correct or 
complete the information  .  .  .  .” (Item 10).  Additionally, the FBI record form warns 
about relying on an arrest report, when there is no conviction (Item 10).    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
 
6The FORM at pages 5-6 provides additional notice to Applicant of the importance of 
documentation showing Applicant’s efforts to resolve his delinquent SOR debts.  
 
7Applicant’s OPM interview on May 22, 2008 (Item 6) is the source for the information in this 
section, unless stated otherwise. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and J (criminal conduct).  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” “It 
is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the 
substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ 
E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish 
either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply.” 
ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (internal citation omitted). 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his OPM 
interview, his response to DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response. His debts, 
including several student loans, have been delinquent for a substantial period of time. In 
Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the 13 debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c to 1.g, 1.i to 
1.k, 1.m, and 1.r to 1.u, totaling $14,670. In his response to interrogatories, he admitted 
responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($218) and 1.p ($218). I conclude these two 
debts are  duplications of each other. 
 
Although Applicant said he made $50 monthly payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.k, and his PFS indicates he planned to or did make $100 monthly payments on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, he did not provide any supporting documentary evidence of such 
payments, such as an account statement from the creditor or his bank account 
statements. There is insufficient evidence of an established payment plan because of 
the absence of such readily available supporting documentation. Even after he was 
advised of the necessity of corroborating documentation in the FORM, he did not 
provide documents showing payments to either of these creditors. 
       
Applicant did not provide any evidence of resolution on the other 11 SOR debts. 
The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant does not receive 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is some 
residual doubt about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent 
SOR debts and is making adequate steps to do so.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by 
unemployment from December 2006 to September 2007. However, he has not provided 
sufficient evidence to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with 
respect to his unresolved SOR debts. On May 22, 2008, Applicant told an OPM 
investigator that he used his tax refund to pay off his student loan debt of about $4,900. 
In January 2009, he responded to DOHA interrogatories and explained he had paid his 
student loans and $1,000 in debt, and predicted that he would pay off the remainder of 
his delinquent debt in 24 months. According to his PFS, he had sufficient financial 
resources to make $100 monthly payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, with a remainder 
of $258 per month. He had sufficient financial resources to begin a payment plan to 
address some of his smaller debts and loans, and chose not to do so.8  
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although Applicant did not receive financial 
counseling, he probably has otherwise learned about financial issues. He generated a 
budget as part of his PFS. Applicant cannot receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(c) 
because he has not paid, started payment plans, disputed, or otherwise resolved at 
least 11 of his SOR debts. There are some initial, positive “indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control.” He has admitted his responsibility for 13 SOR 
debts. Although he may have payment plans on two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m), he did 
not provide documentation showing any payments to these two creditors. He promised 
to eventually resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He also established some mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d) because he showed some good faith9 in the resolution of his SOR 
debts by admitting responsibility for 13 of his SOR debts, payment of his delinquent 
student loans in early 2008, and promising to resolve his delinquent SOR debts.  
 
In January 2009, Applicant questioned his responsibility for multiple SOR debts, 
and said he would contact credit reporting companies for verification. In his SOR 
response, he admitted responsibility for 13 of his delinquent SOR debts, and denied 
responsibility for eight SOR debts. In his response to DOHA interrogatories, he admitted 
responsibility for one more SOR debt. I conclude the seven SOR debts he consistently 
denied are not sufficiently established as his responsibility, and find “For Applicant” in 
the Formal Findings on page 13, infra.   
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He said he has payment plans on the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m; however, there is insufficient supporting documentation to 
credit him with mitigating these two substantial debts. In his SOR response, he 
contested his responsibility for eight debts. In his DOHA interrogatories, he admitted 
more debts than he did in his SOR response. Two debts apparently duplicate each 
other (SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($200) and 1.p ($200)). He has had steady employment since 
October 2007, and he has not shown significant progress on his SOR debts since his 
May 22, 2008, OPM interview. His steps since May 22, 2008, are simply inadequate to 
fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to criminal conduct, 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. There is substantial evidence of one felony-level 
offense. Applicant was charged with theft of a motor vehicle in November 2006 (SOR ¶ 
2.a). There is also substantial evidence of one misdemeanor-level offense. In 1999 or 
2000, he was charged with writing a worthless check (SOR ¶ 2.b).10 The theft of the 
motor vehicle offense was dismissed. He was convicted of the worthless check offense 
and fined about $150. He denied the felony-level offense.    
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
10He denied to the OPM investigator and in his SOR response that he had an arrest for writing 
worthless checks in November 2006. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶ 32(a) applies to the worthless check offense in 1999 or 2000. It occurred 
approximately nine years ago. AG ¶ 32(c) applies to the vehicle theft. He took a 
dealership vehicle home with him overnight, and left his vehicle behind. Taking the 
vehicle home without being absolutely sure he had permission showed poor judgment; 
however, the charge was dismissed about a year after he was arrested. Applicant's last 
offense resulting in a conviction occurred in 1999 or 2000. It was a misdemeanor. He 
demonstrated his intent not to commit future crimes as encompassed in these two 
mitigating conditions. He has worked with information technology and has a good 
employment record. He accepted responsibility and admitted his culpability. He has 
shown sufficient mitigation to mitigate criminal conduct concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his clearance. Applicant is 37 years old, and he is sufficiently mature to 
understand and abide with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial credit 
for volunteering to support the Department of Defense as an employee of a defense 
contractor. There is no evidence that he has ever violated security rules. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States, the Department of Defense, and his 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. He has 
never been fired from a job or left employment under adverse circumstances. His 
unemployment from December 2006 to September 2007 contributed to his financial 
woes. Although he did not provide any proof from creditors or his own account 
statements, I accept his statement that in 2008, he paid his delinquent student loan of 
about $4,900 and about $1000 towards some other debts. These factors show some 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Failure to pay or resolve his just debts is not prudent or 
responsible. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He began to have financial 
difficulties several years ago during a period of unemployment. On May 22, 2008, in his 
OPM interview, in January 2009, in his response to DOHA interrogatories, and in July 
2009, in his SOR response, he discussed his SOR debts. He had ample notice of his 
delinquent SOR debts, and sufficient opportunity to contact his creditors. He did not 
make sufficient progress in the resolution of his SOR debts. He did not pay, start 
payments, dispute, or otherwise resolve 13 SOR debts. His PFS shows a monthly 
payment of $100 towards the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m, and he said in his DOHA 
interrogatories that he was making $50 monthly payments towards the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.k. I do not accept his statements about making or intending to make payments on the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m as sufficient to show he has an established payment plan 
on these two debts. In January 2009, he said he had sufficient income to pay all of his 
SOR debts in 24 months; however, he did not provide documentary evidence of any 
payments after January 2009 on any of his SOR debts.   
 
In conclusion, Applicant made insufficient progress to resolve his delinquent SOR 
debts, even though he had steady employment since October 2007 and ample 
opportunity to contact his SOR creditors and provide documentation. He was on clear 
notice from his receipt of DOHA interrogatories, and even more so after he received the 
SOR, that he needed to show substantial progress in the resolution of his delinquent 
SOR debts; however, he did not provide documentation showing his efforts to 
accomplish this security responsibility.    
   
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the criminal conduct concerns; however, he has not mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the 
whole person factors and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. Applicant has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.g: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i to 1.k:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n and 1.o: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:   For Applicant (duplicates 1.i) 
Subparagraphs 1.q to 1.u:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
