1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04470
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Etta L. Walker, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on September 21,
2006. On February 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
J, G, and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on September 18, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October
1, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 29, 2009. The
Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-6), which were received into the record without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented the testimony of four
witnesses. He submitted Exhibits (AE A-C) at the hearing which were admitted into the
2
record without objection. I held the record open until November 12, 2009, so that
Applicant could submit additional documents. The submission was timely received,
marked as (AE D) and entered into the record. Department Counsel did not object to the
documents. DOHA received the transcript on November 6, 2009. Based upon a review
of the record, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 23, 2009, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d, and 1.e. through 1.h, and 2.a. and 2.b. He denied
the allegations in ¶¶ 3.a. and 3.b of the SOR. He provided additional information to
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He received his
undergraduate degree in 1980. He is a licensed realtor. Applicant is divorced and has a
step-daughter who lives with him and his wife. He was employed as an engineer from
1981 until 2004 with a large company. He worked as a consultant until 2007. Applicant
has held a security clearance during his professional career. He has been with his
current employer since May 2007 (Tr. 121).
In November 1982, Applicant was with some friends in a bar. He consumed
approximately three to five alcoholic beverages. As he was driving home, Applicant was
stopped by the police. He was charged with (1) possession of a controlled substance,
(2) driving while intoxicated, and (3) driving under the influence of drugs. He pleaded
guilty and was sentenced to two years probation and received a fine (GE 5).
Applicant admits that he was driving his own car, but it was also an assigned
company car. He had two roommates who also used the car and he believes that the
controlled substance belonged to one of the roommates (Tr. 127). He also claimed that
he pled guilty because he did not have an attorney. He believes he was not intoxicated
(Tr. 128).
In April 1986, Applicant was at a restaurant where he had consumed two
alcoholic beverages. He was stopped by the police while he was driving home. He was
charged with (1) driving while ability impaired, (2) illegal turn around, (3) expired license
plates, and (4) failure to use or no turn signal. The alcohol-related charge was
dismissed. He was found guilty of counts (3) and (4). He was also fined. Applicant
believed that he was the subject of police harassment.
In May 1991, Applicant attended a bachelor party for a friend. He was “ticketed
for mooning out the window of a bus.” He was charged with unlawful public indecency,
and he pleaded guilty. He believes he was singled out and ticketed. He claims he was
“ticketed” and not arrested (Tr. 130). He explained that it was an embarrassing event
but it was harmless. Applicant was 33 years old at the time.
3
In October 1995, Applicant was out with friends for the evening drinking. His
friend was too impaired to drive home, so Applicant decided to drive (Tr. 130). He was
charged with (1) failure to use or no control turn signal, and (2) driving while under the
influence of alcohol (DUI). He pleaded guilty to DUI. He was sentenced to probation and
received a fine. His driver’s license was revoked. Applicant completed a level 1 alcohol
education class. He also completed 24 hours of community service (GE 2).
After Applicant divorced his first wife, he resided in a home with several
roommates. He denies that he was ever in the residence when complaints were made
about noise. From 2000 until 2005, neighbors made complaints about noise (loud
music) coming from his home. Applicant explained that he was single at the time and
had other people, including a girlfriend, stay at the house, without his permission (Tr.
131). He believes that no charges were filed against him (Tr. 132).
In 2005, Applicant had a party at his residence. A live band was playing and the
neighbors complained about the noise. A complaint was made to the county sheriff
concerning the noise. Applicant believes he was given a warning (Tr. 132).
In February 2006, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct/noise. He was
sentenced to one year of probation and he received a fine (GE 4). Applicant blamed this
incident on a friend who was staying at his condominium, who became very loud,
intoxicated, and unmanageable one evening. She caused a disturbance and the police
were called (Tr. 133).
In January 2007, Applicant and his wife had dinner in a restaurant (Tr. 137). They
had consumed alcohol and he drove home because he believed she was too intoxicated
to drive. He was stopped on his way home and was charged with (1) driving under the
influence second offense, (2) ran a stop sign, and (3) failure to maintain a single lane.
He pleaded nolo contendere to count (1) and was sentenced to one year probation, a
fine, revocation of his driver’s license, and DUI school. (GE 3).
Applicant argued at the hearing that he was followed by the police from the
restaurant. He was adamant that he did not run a stop sign nor did he weave on the
road (Tr. 137). Applicant also believed he was not “illegally driving under the influence.”
Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application on September 21, 2006.
He answered “No” to Section 23(f) “In the last seven years have you been arrested for,
charged with, or convicted of any offense not listed above” He did not list his February
2006 disorderly conduct charge. He states that he completely forgot about it. He also
stated that he did not feel that it fell under “that area” (Tr. 141) and did not have to be
reported. He elaborated that it was the result of an unruly acquaintance of his, and he
did not want to deal with it anymore (Tr. 141). At the hearing, he explained that he was
focusing on the DUI incidents and “I considered that very minimal” (Tr. 142). 
In a July 5, 2007, interview with an investigator from DoD, Applicant did not
mention that police were called to his residence in February 2006 for the noise
4
complaints and disorderly conduct charge. He states that he completely forgot about the
charge because it was the result of an incident caused by an acquaintance with whom
he no longer associates. He denies that he deliberately failed to disclose this
information (Tr. 159). In the interview, Applicant stated that he had no other alcohol-
related arrests and he advised that he had not had any other “problems with law
enforcement or been questioned by authorities in the last seven years (GE 2).   
In July 2007, Applicant was referred to a state treatment agency for the January
2007 DUI offense (AE B). He met with a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW), who is
also a certified abuse counselor (CAC). Applicant completed an initial written
assessment and attended group meetings twice a week. Applicant was evaluated and
was given a low probability of having alcohol dependence (AE B; Tr 43). He received a
diagnosis of alcohol abuse (Tr. 54). Applicant abstained from drinking during the
treatment. In April 2008, Applicant successfully completed 68 hours of Level II therapy
(AE B).
At the hearing, the LCSW testified that it is highly unlikely that Applicant would
have another alcohol-related driving charge because he took responsibility for his
actions. Applicant completed the level II program (alcohol classes for 34 weeks) (Tr.
77). The LCSW explained that Applicant was conscientious in his attendance and was a
thoughtful individual. Upon cross-examination, the LCSW acknowledged that Applicant
did minimize his responsibility for use of alcohol in his answers to the SOR (Tr. 63). 
Applicant claims that he occasionally has wine with his wife at dinner. He does
not drink during the week (Tr. 151). He believes he drinks every other weekend (Tr.
152). He also stated that he no longer kept alcohol in the house (Tr ). He amended that
by stating that his wife does keep some wine in the home (Tr. 150). Applicant does not
drive after drinking outside the home (Tr. 152).
In 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. When he admitted an allegation, he
consistently offered a reason why the arrest or charge should not have occurred.
Specifically, with regard to the April 1986 DUI, he believed he was the subject of police
harassment. Applicant denied that he was illegally driving under the influence in January
2007, and noted that the police car followed him from the restaurant until he was pulled
over when he was almost home. He explained that he believed he was discriminated
against and unlawfully charged with offenses that he did not commit. However, he also
acknowledged that his drinking was “borderline.” As for the disorderly conduct charge in
2006, he pleaded guilty but blamed the incident on a friend. For his earlier alcohol-
related incidents in 1982, he maintained that he did not have an attorney and pleaded
guilty even though he knew he was not over the legal limit (Tr. 127). He also said that
he was “singled out” for the unlawful public indecency charge (Tr. 129).
Applicant was adamant that since he has held a clearance for 20 years and has
never had any security violations, he should be granted his clearance. He claims he has
learned from his mistakes in the past and has adjusted his behavior accordingly.
5
At the hearing, Applicant appeared smug and noted that he learned from the
group counseling that “consequences could happen to even me, you know, if you don’t
control things” (Tr. 169). His attitude, despite, what the LCSW reported, did not appear
to be one of taking responsibility for his actions. He had an excuse for almost every
incident that had occurred over the years. He distanced himself from each event. His
job importance appeared to override his ability to accept responsibility for “minor rules
and regulations,” such as the noise complaints. I find he minimized the severity of each
charge. 
Applicant has many letters of commendation and certificates of recognition from
1993 until the present (AE A). He has 20 years’ service recognition with one employer
(AE A) He has made outstanding contributions to launch and satellite systems over the
past years. Applicant is rated as an outstanding manager who has excellent
communication and time management skills (AE C). 
The security manager has known Applicant for 15 years. He has never observed
any behavior on Applicant’s part that would cause him to question his judgment or
reliability (Tr. 94). He is aware that Applicant has several alcohol-related driving
offenses, but does not believe that it rises to the level of concern (Tr. 98).
Applicant’s current manager described Applicant as a valuable employee
(Tr.107). He praised Applicant’s vast knowledge and level of experience. Applicant
displays a high degree of honesty, loyalty, and integrity to his management and his
team (Tr. 115). 
Applicant’s evaluations rate him as a “successful contributor” to his employer. He
has outstanding and advanced management skills. He is praised by his colleagues and
former supervisors as highly skilled and invaluable to the team mission.
Applicant is lauded for his integration management skills. His technical expertise
in the satellite program is key. He has many years of crucial experience (Tr. 27). He is a
trustworthy and reliable engineer and manager (Tr. 34). His former manager praised
Applicant and has no hesitation in recommending Applicant for a security clearance (Tr
36).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
6
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By it’s
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and “(c) allegation
7
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
Applicant was arrested in 1982, 1986, 1991, 1995, and 2007. Applicant has four
arrests for DUI or driving while impaired by alcohol. He was convicted of DUI in 1995. In
2007, Applicant was arrested, charged, and pleaded nolo contendere to DUI Second
Offense. He was charged and pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct in February 2006.
AG ¶ 31(a) and (c) apply in this case.
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
Applicant had four incidents involving alcohol/driving from 1982 until 2007. He
was convicted of several misdemeanor offenses. He completed probation successfully
in 2008. He attended court-ordered alcohol treatment in 2008.  
Applicant’s last incident of criminal conduct was the 2007 DUI (second offense).
He completed probation last year. However, insufficient time without offenses has
passed when compared to the more than 20 years, from 1982 to 2007, of alcohol-
related offenses to mitigate the government’s case. He has shown that he is on the right
track, but it is too soon to find that he is successfully rehabilitated. Thus, AG ¶ 32(a) and
(d) do not fully apply in this case
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption,
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability
and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, “(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” and “22(c) “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent.”
8
In this case, Applicant admitted that he consumed alcohol, at times to excess and
to the point of intoxication, from approximately 1979 to at least July 2007. He was
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser in 2007, after his second DUI offense. Although, he
argues he was not DUI, he acknowledges his other alcohol-related arrests. Some of the
charges were dismissed, but Applicant was convicted of DUI twice. AG ¶¶ 22 (a) and (c)
apply.
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
(C) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant has not fully acknowledged his problem with alcohol. Although he
completed a treatment program, he consistently minimized his involvement in the
alcohol-related incidents. He denied that he was illegally driving under the influence in
2007. He did not believe he was intoxicated in several other incidents. He has modified
his drinking habits and does not drink and drive. His therapist believes that Applicant is
very unlikely to re-offend. I am not convinced that Applicant has taken full responsibility
for his past excessive alcohol consumption.
Applicant has an outstanding work record spanning 20 years. He is
recommended for his fine work. He has many letters of commendation and appreciation
for his diligence in his field. The last alcohol-related incident occurred in January 2007.
Given the poor judgment shown over the years and minimization of his alcohol-related
incidents there is still an issue of concern. Applicant has not fully mitigated the alcohol
consumption concerns under AG ¶¶ 23(a), (b), and (d). 
9
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities” is
potentially disqualifying.
Applicant denied that he had a deliberate intent to falsify his answers to the
questions. When a falsification allegation is controverted, the government has the
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish pr prove
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine where there is direct
or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time
the omission occurred. 
Applicant was not credible in his various explanations concerning the omissions
described above. He stated that he forgot about the February 2006 incident and then
contradicted that statement with the fact that it was a nightmare and he wanted to forget
it or that he was focusing on DUIs rather than any other incidents. He also had been on
probation for the incident in September 2006, and completed his security clearance
application shortly thereafter. Applicant also did not disclose to the investigator during
his interview that he had any problems with the law or had been questioned by
authorities during the last seven years.  At one point, he stated that it did not rise to the
level of something that needed to be reported. 
After considering the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them apply in this
case.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
10
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated, highly
respected employee. He has held a security clearance for many years without security
violations. Several character witnesses highly recommended Applicant for a security
clearance.
Applicant’s patterns of criminal conduct and problems with alcohol span a long
period. His most recent incident was in 2007. He completed probation in 2008. He has
taken steps in the right direction, but at this time Applicant has not met his burden of
proof to overcome the government’s case.
Applicant is a seasoned employee who has completed security clearance
applications several times. His explanations as to why he did not list his February 2006
disorderly conduct charge on his security clearance application are not credible. He
intentionally omitted the information from the application and the interview in 2007. He
did not fully disclose alcohol use to the investigator.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal
conduct , alcohol consumption, and personal conduct concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
11
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
