 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-05204 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on July 20, 2007. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2 
                                                
On April 27, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on June 7, 2009, in which he admitted two 
allegations and denied six allegations under Guideline E. Applicant requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
August 3, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on September 14, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
October 14, 2009. The government offered six exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and did not present other witness testimony. He also offered three exhibits, 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. However, on October 15, 2009, 
Applicant moved to re-open the record to admit an additional character reference. I 
opened the record and added it to Applicant's character references exhibit, AE B. The 
record closed on October 15, 2009. DOHA received the transcript on October 20, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are accepted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, 
and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He holds a bachelor’s degree in business. He also 
completed coursework toward a master’s degree (AE C; Tr. 21). Applicant worked in the 
computer field in the late 1980s. From 1988 to 2001, he worked as a stunt double and 
body double for a movie actor (AE C). In about 1995, he began working in training films 
for a federal government agency (agency A) (Tr. 23-26). He received his first security 
clearance through agency A in approximately 1998 (Tr. 92). From 2001 to the present, 
he has continued to work in information technology. As of November 2008, he held the 
position of client sales executive for a defense contractor (GE 3). Applicant has never 
been married, but has been in a committed relationship since the mid-1990s. He has a 
nine-year-old daughter from this relationship (Tr. 26-27). 
 
From June to August 2001, Applicant was employed by company B as a senior 
network engineer. Company B was a subcontractor to defense contractor C. Applicant 
worked on-site at defense contractor C’s location, where he reported to a defense 
contractor C manager. Company B instructed Applicant to report on his timesheet the 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
                                                
actual hours worked on a certain defense contract. On August 9, 2001, an email to 
company B employees reiterated that all hours worked were required to be reported on 
timesheets. Applicant testified that he worked many overtime hours, but did not report 
them because he was told by his defense contractor C manager that he was not 
authorized to work overtime, and he would be terminated if he reported the extra hours. 
Company B told him that his on-site defense contractor manager was not the person 
authorized to pay for overtime hours (Tr. 54-55). Applicant testified that company B was 
being paid for overtime hours reported by other employees (Tr. 54). In August 2001, he 
was terminated by company B for falsifying his time cards. The company B president 
described Applicant as “technically competent, ambitious, confident, arrogant and 
deceitful.” The company B facility security assistant found Applicant to be high-strung 
but goal-oriented and competent. She could not recommend him, however, because of 
“Subject’s actions when he worked for [company B].” Applicant testified that company B 
was later released from the contract, but that he was retained by defense contractor C. 
He disclosed the termination on his 2001 and 2007 security clearance applications (GE 
1, 2, 6; AE C; Tr. 50-51, 54-56). 
 
After starting with a new employer in September 2001, Applicant completed an 
application for a secret clearance through the Department of Defense in December 
2001 (GE 2). In response to question #27, concerning drug use in the previous seven 
years (1994–2001), he disclosed that he used marijuana during the month of July 1995, 
although he did not know the number of times (GE 2). During a follow-up interview with 
an agent of the Defense Security Service in May 2003, Applicant stated that he used 
marijuana “during my early teens and during college as well as I had some occasional 
use at parties up until 1995. I stopped using ‘pot’ after this time and I have no intention 
of using it in the future.” (GE 5).   
 
Applicant held a secret security clearance in the late 1990s when he performed 
in training films for government agency A (Tr. 53). Agency A requested that Applicant 
apply to upgrade his clearance to top secret (GE 1; Tr. 27).3 During the security 
interview in July 2003, Applicant reported that he had not used marijuana since 1995, 
when he used it twice at parties (AE C). His co-workers, who were interviewed as part 
of this investigation, described applicant as stable, focused, and professional. None 
stated that they were aware of any illegal drug use by Applicant (GE 3).  
 
 
3 The evidence indicates that two investigations were ongoing simultaneously. One was initiated by 
agency A to upgrade Applicant's clearance to top secret. He completed a security clearance application 
in April 2003, and agency A interviewed Applicant and administered two polygraph examinations 
between 2003 and 2004, Based on the results of the July 2004 polygraph interview, agency A revoked 
Applicant's security clearance and issued an SOR in October 2004. Applicant appealed the decision, 
and a hearing was set for January 2007, but was not held. An investigation for a Department of Defense 
(DoD) secret security clearance was initiated with the December 2001 security clearance application. 
Applicant was interviewed by a DoD agent in May 2003. He received a security clearance that year. He 
learned in 2007 that this security clearance was revoked. He testified that he did not know the reason, 
and he re-applied for a security clearance in July 2007 (GE 1). 
 
 
4 
                                                
Applicant testified that he completed two polygraph examinations as part of the 
agency A investigation (Tr. 28). The interviewer who administered the second polygraph 
in July 2004 focused on the use of illegal drugs. According to the agency A SOR4 the 
Applicant stated during the polygraph interview that he: 
 
• Used marijuana from his early teens to May 2004 
 
• Smoked marijuana daily in the late 1980s but quit using it in 1995 
 
• Smoked sporadically from 1997 until he again quit in 2001 
 
• Resumed smoking in 2002 
 
• Smoked marijuana 12 to 15 times between June 2002 and June 2004 
 
• Was concerned about work-related drug testing as he had held a security 
clearance during these periods  
 
• Would find it difficult to follow an employer’s drug-free policy because it 
would entail avoiding family and friends who used marijuana 
 
• Gave his brother $100 to buy marijuana, which Applicant stored in his 
home to share with family and friends (GE 3). 
 
Applicant denies making these statements during the polygraph interview (Tr. 60-63). 
However, the interviewer concluded that Applicant had provided false information about 
his drug use on his April 2003 security clearance application and in his July 2003 
security interview (GE 3; Tr. 41-42). The agency issued an SOR in July 2004, citing 
concerns about Applicant's illegal drug use and personal conduct, and revoked 
Applicant's security clearance in October 2004.  
 
 In his response to the agency A SOR, Applicant stated that a misunderstanding 
occurred during the polygraph interview. Applicant testified that the interviewer asked 
him to share negative information of which the agency was not aware. He denied having 
any such information to share. The interviewer rephrased it as a hypothetical: If a 
foreign country were to blackmail him, what negative information about Applicant could 
the country provide to the agency? He said that in such a scenario, the foreign country 
could disclose that he had used marijuana in the past (GE 3; Tr. 41-43). Applicant 
testified,  
 
 
4 Agency A’s SOR (GE 3) describes Applicant's statements made during the July 2004 polygraph 
interview. It was admitted without objection. Such documents are admissible under Federal Rules of 
Evidence 803(b) “to present evidence about the findings and conclusions reached by a government 
entity,” and they should be considered as substantial evidence (ISCR Case No. 02-12299 at 4-5 (App. 
Bd. Aug 8, 2005).  
 
 
5 
APPLICANT: …But then she said, “Did you smoke recently,” or “more 
recently?” or something of that matter, and I said, “They could say I did.  
I did not, but they could say I did.”  
 
(Applicant then testified that the agent asked, “Well, why could they say you 
did?”) 
 
APPLICANT: And then we got into this whole discussion around I 
attended parties and there were some family events where smoking of 
marijuana does go on. And -- but I was very clear there's a difference 
between smoking of marijuana going on and me smoking. And then we 
got into a whole discussion of, well, how many times were these events 
and I was honest -- and I still can't tell you how many parties these were 
-- there were. (Tr. 42-44) 
 
Applicant then told the agent that the family events occurred approximately once or 
twice per year, and that his family members were not consistent drug users. Applicant's 
counsel asked if Applicant and the agent discussed his own drug use at these events: 
 
APPLICANT: I -- it never -- she never asked.  I'm clear that I didn't, but 
she never -- that was never a question that was placed on the table. 
 
MR. EISEN: And so what were you talking about, secondhand smoke?  
   
APPLICANT: At that time I was -- I was talking about secondhand 
smoke, and I don't know if you remember the Nineties, but especially 
when someone quits, they blow a lot near or at you or make fun of you.  
So, it was all secondhand smoke (Tr. 45-46). 
 
It appears from Applicant’s testimony that during his interview he was concerned that 
associating with persons who were using marijuana at family parties and inhaling 
second-hand smoke might be illegal, or interpreted as illegal drug use on his part (Tr. 
46-47). 
 
 The agency’s SOR alleged that Applicant answered “No” to questions on a 
2003 security clearance application relating to his illegal drug use, and his use while 
holding a security clearance. Applicant testified that he was upset and irate when he 
read the SOR (Tr. 28). In his response to the agency’s SOR, he stated,  
 
I believe the interviewer miss-understood [sic] my statements during the 
review and/or the [sic] recorded some things incorrectly out of context. I 
believe that these miss-perceptions or errors have lead to a belief that I 
am un-trust worthy, dishonest and that I lack condor. I contend that all of 
these perceptions are incorrect.…Regarding the drug use, please note 
that I contend that this too is a part of what was incorrectly documented 
 
 
6 
within the context of my discussions. I also have always expressed a 
willingness to under-go a drug test and I expressed that I have 
successfully taken drug tests. 
 
He requested a hearing and in December 2004, the agency informed him that he would 
be notified when a hearing would be held (GE 3).  
 
 In November 2006, agency A notified Applicant that his hearing would take 
place on December 13 at 9:00 a.m. The day before the hearing, Applicant asked that it 
be re-scheduled to January 3 or 4, 2007. The hearing was re-set for January 4, 2007 at 
9:00 a.m. He was contacted to confirm notice of the hearing, but he did not return the 
calls. Agency A’s letter dated January 9, 2007 informed him that if he did not contact 
the agency, his appeal would be cancelled. Applicant did not respond, and the hearing 
did not take place. In March 2008, he told a DoD investigator that the appeal was not 
granted in a timely manner. In November 2008, Applicant stated that he could not 
respond timely because of work commitments (GE 3).  
 
 At the October 2009 hearing, he denied that a hearing date was scheduled at 
all. He denied that he failed to appear at the agency hearing, stating, “It wasn't a no-
show, so I should be clear with that. It was not a case that I did not show up. It was a 
case that I said I was not going to have it. I did not do a no-show.” (Tr. 106). When 
asked why he would say that, when he had submitted documents showing a scheduled 
hearing, he testified, “…We talked about one, but we did not schedule it.  So -- but I -- 
so, I don't know.” (GE 3; Tr. 73-74). According to his testimony, agency A called him in 
late 2006 and asked if he wished to continue the security clearance process. He told 
the agent he did not wish to continue the process with agency A. He testified that he 
did not understand that loss of the agency clearance could affect his DoD clearance, 
and that if he had known, he would have attended the agency hearing (Tr. 30-33). 
 
 In his March 2008 statement to a DoD investigator, Applicant did not disclose 
that his security clearance had been revoked because of illegal drug use. He wrote, “I 
state that I had a [agency] clearance (top secret) revoked in 2004. I could not recall the 
reasons.” (GE 4). When asked at the hearing if he forgot why agency A revoked his 
clearance, Applicant testified, 
 
APPLICANT: “I would say "forget" as in "I don't know what happened," or 
"forget" as in -- as in -- what?  I mean, the [agency] revoked my 
clearance because I didn't go on an interview, was my understanding.” 
(Tr. 69).  
 
 In July 2007, Applicant's DoD security clearance was revoked. He testified that 
an SOR was not issued, and neither he nor his security officer knew why it was 
revoked. He submitted a new security clearance application. He listed the revocation of 
two security clearances, stating that he lost his security clearance because he “Failed 
to pass Polygraph Test and thus failed to recieve [sic] upgrade to Top Secret 
 
 
7 
                                                
Clearance.” (GE 1). In response to questions concerning illegal drug use within the 
previous seven years, and illegal drug use while holding a security clearance, Applicant 
answered “No” to both questions (GE 1, 3; Tr. 72-73). 
 
 Applicant submitted several character references (AE B). A family friend, who 
has known Applicant for 12 years, stated that he is honest and trustworthy. She 
nominated him for the board of directors of an educational organization because he is a 
strong role model. Two former Navy officers, who currently manage accounts that 
Applicant supports, have known him for several years and are familiar with his work 
performance. One noted that Applicant is a man of integrity who is committed to 
supporting the military. The other manager commented on Applicant's honesty, 
trustworthiness and patriotism, and noted that granting his clearance would enhance 
mission effectiveness. A Navy lieutenant commander who has known Applicant for four 
to five years commented that Applicant is a strong and hardworking leader on work 
projects and is a man of integrity. Applicant's girlfriend, with whom he has lived since 
the mid-1990s, is a doctor of optometry. She related that Applicant is dedicated to his 
family, coaches their daughter’s soccer team, stresses healthy living, and would not 
engage in drug use. She noted that Applicant is highly respected in his neighborhood, 
and served on his community association board of directors and as its president.  
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
8 
                                                
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
9 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:…(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations 
 
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified answers regarding 
his illegal drug use on security clearance applications in 2001 and 2007; and in written 
statements submitted to government investigators in May 2003 and March 2008. His 
drug use was disclosed during his polygraph interview in 2004, when he provided 
details showing that his marijuana use ended not in 1995, but in 2004. He provided 
specifics of his frequency and pattern of marijuana usage: the dates when he used it 
on a daily basis, when he stopped using it, when he resumed usage, when he used it 
sporadically, and the number of times he used in between 2002 and 2004. He also 
disclosed that he gave his brother money for marijuana, that he used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance, and discussed the difficulties presented by being 
employed in a drug-free workplace. Applicant denies making these statements during 
the interview. He claims that the interviewer posed a hypothetical scenario, and his 
subsequent responses to it were misunderstood. However, his explanation was not 
credible. His testimony about the hypothetical, about the illegality of associating with 
drug users, and about second-hand smoke was ambiguous, unclear, and does not 
explain the relation between the hypothetical and the numerous specifics he provided 
about his drug use. I find that the detailed disclosures during the polygraph interview 
are an accurate representation of the dates, times, frequency and circumstances of 
Applicant's illegal drug use, and that his statements on his security clearance 
applications and in his other interviews were falsifications. 
 
Several other statements made by Applicant are not credible.  
 
• He provided contradictory information about the hearing with 
agency A. He testified that a hearing was never scheduled when, in 
fact, GE 3 shows that a hearing was not only scheduled once, but 
was rescheduled a second time at Applicant's own request. He 
testified that he “was not a no-show” at the hearing, in spite of the 
fact that his documents show he did not appear at the hearing.  
 
• In his 2001 security clearance application, he stated that he used 
marijuana in the month of July 1995. However, in 2003 he said that 
he used it in his teens and at college (which were both outside the 
scope of the pertinent question), but also occasionally at parties up 
until 1995. This indicates he used marijuana more often than one 
month in 1995.  
 
• Applicant stated that he was irate and upset when he received the 
agency A SOR. Given his anger, and the threat this SOR caused to 
 
 
10 
his career, it is difficult to understand why he did not state, 
anywhere in his response, that the drug-use allegations were 
untrue; instead, he equivocated by saying his statements were 
misunderstood and misperceived.  
 
• Applicant's 2008 statement that he could not remember why he 
received the agency A SOR is not credible, given the SOR’s 
significance, and the anger he said it provoked.  
 
AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 16(d) is relevant to Applicant's employment termination. Applicant failed to 
report on his time-card the actual hours he worked, and testified that he could not 
satisfy the reporting requirements of both company A and defense contractor B. He 
chose to ignore the requirements of his employer, company A. However, other company 
A employees did report their overtime hours. There is no record evidence or testimony 
that they were reprimanded or terminated for doing so, and there is testimony that they 
were paid for those hours. The fact that the defense contractor may have released 
company A from the contract, and retained Applicant, does not mitigate the fact that 
Applicant falsified his time cards by not reporting his true work hours. His decision to 
disregard his employer’s repeated instructions reflects poorly on his judgment, 
trustworthiness and willingness to comply with rules. AG ¶ 16(d) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant's falsifications are unmitigated. The record contains no evidence that 
Applicant attempted to correct his security clearance applications, or his statements in 
his security interviews, regarding his use of illegal drugs after 1995. His illegal conduct 
did not come to light until 2004, during his second security interview with agency A. 
Although his falsifications in 2001 and 2003 are not recent, his falsification in a 2008 
interview occurred less than two years ago. Moreover, his conduct cannot be 
considered minor. He falsified information provided to the government numerous times. 
Such actions undermine the security clearance process and raise serious doubts about 
Applicant's reliability and judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) cannot be applied. 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
Whole Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant provided specifics of his drug use after 1995 during his interview with 
agency A, but later denied that these detailed admissions were true. His last 
falsification occurred in 2008, when he was a mature adult 44 years of age. Moreover, 
although drug use was not alleged and is not outcome-determinative, it does go to the 
assessment of the whole person. Applicant's willingness to engage in criminal conduct 
by using illegal drugs as a mature adult, and while holding a security clearance, 
undermines his trustworthiness. Applicant described a hypothetical scenario posed by 
the interviewer, without providing a rational connection between that scenario and the 
detailed information he provided about his marijuana use. He falsified other 
information, including time-card information, for which he as terminated, and his 
testimony about the agency A hearing, which directly contradicted his own documents.  
 
 Overall, Applicant's falsifications raise serious doubts about his suitability for 
access to classified information. The record evidence fails to satisfy these doubts, 
which must be resolved in favor of the national security. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited 
adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.h.:  Against Applicant  
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
