1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------, ---------- ------ )       ADP Case No. 08-09465
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred around $20,000 in delinquent debt over the past six years due
to periods of unemployment. She discharged these debts through recent Chapter 7
bankruptcy proceedings, and has sufficient income to remain solvent in the future.
Financial security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a thorough review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive
information is granted. 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation).
2
Applicant submitted her Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P), on April 15,
2008. On June 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); the
Regulation (supra); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD)
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 30, 2009. She answered the
SOR in writing on July 15, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative
judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 4, 2009, and DOHA
assigned the case to me on September 10, 2009.
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 1, 2009, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on October 27, 2009. Department Counsel offered Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on
her own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were also admitted
without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until November
15, 2009, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript of
the hearing (Tr.) on November 4, 2009. On November 14, 2009, Applicant forwarded
this evidence to Department Counsel, who forwarded it without objection the following
day. The evidence was marked AE C through F and admitted. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where she has
worked for almost two years as a customer service representative. She is married to a
member of the National Guard, who has been mobilized and deployed to Iraq five times
since 2003. They have three children, ages 16, 14, and 11. Both she and her husband,
between his mobilization periods, have endured multiple periods of unemployment over
the past six years. (GE 1 at 1-5; Tr. at 28-29, 37.) In her answer, she admitted to all of
the allegations in the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
Applicant’s 44 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR total $33,044. Most of them
are for relatively minor amounts, and many are for medical services incurred during
periods when her family was not covered by health insurance. The largest alleged debt
is $13,664 for a vehicle that was voluntarily repossessed when it developed mechanical
problems shortly after she bought it. The seller refused to cover the necessary repairs
under warranty, and she returned the vehicle because she could not afford to pay for
them. It is not clear where the $13,664 balance is substantiated, since all record credit
reports show a zero balance due on this account. The remaining 43 delinquent debts to
which Applicant admitted total $19,380. (GE 2 at 10; GE 3 at 3; GE 5 at 4; GE 6 at 4;
GE 7 at 3; Tr. at 46-50.)
3
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in July 2009, and her debts were
discharged in November 2009. The schedule of creditors holding unsecured nonpriority
claims listed $25,395 in debts. (AE C.) Applicant completed the required financial
counseling in March 2009, and the debtor education course on personal financial
management in September 2009. (AE A.) Her budget projections reflect a monthly
surplus of income over expenses ranging from $92 to $1,379. (AE C at Schedules I and
J; AE D; AE E.) She has received numerous written commendations for her excellent
customer service. (AE B.) Her supervisor’s summary comments in her annual
performance evaluation state that, “[she] has shown a steady improvement this year
and is very dependable. She is extremely patient and a great customer service rep. She
is a great asset to the team.” (AE F at 6.) During the hearing, Applicant displayed a full
understanding of her previous financial problems, and a sincere determination to take
advantage of the fresh start from bankruptcy and avoid incurring delinquent debt in the
future.   
 
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . .
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security)
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”
A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified
or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Department Counsel argued persuasively that the evidence raised two of
these potentially disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;”
and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant admitted owing more
than 40 SOR-listed delinquent debts totaling almost $20,000, and cited more than
$25,000 in debt on her bankruptcy petition. The record shows a six-year history during
which Applicant was frequently unable to satisfy some of her debts. 
5
Department Counsel also mentioned the potential applicability of AG ¶ 19(b),
“indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any
evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the
debt.” (Tr. at 18.) Having evaluated the nature, quantity, and amounts involved in
Applicant’s debts, I find no evidence of irresponsible or frivolous spending. Given her
unemployment problems, and the expenses inherent in supporting a family with three
teenagers, the relatively small amount of delinquent debt shows careful management of
available, albeit insufficient, financial resources. There was neither any allegation nor
proof of compulsive, addictive, or problem gambling. Nor was there any evidence of
drug abuse, alcoholism, or deceptive financial practices. Accordingly, no other Guideline
F disqualifying condition was established. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a
history of unpaid debt. Since Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of any SOR-listed
debt, the four potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s delinquencies arose frequently and continued until very recently.
However, she has now secured steady employment, and all prior debt was discharged
in her 2009 Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding. Her current income is more than
sufficient to cover living expenses, so recurrence of financial problems is unlikely. Her
financial problems arose largely due to involuntary unemployment and her husband’s
frequent mobilization for overseas deployment with the National Guard. These causes
do not reflect poor reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment on Applicant’s part.
Accordingly, she established some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). 
I also find some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s, and her husband’s,
periods of unemployment were involuntary and are now resolved. Many of the debts
were for necessary medical expenses incurred during periods when they did not have
health insurance. The relatively small amount of total debt under the circumstances
6
reflects Applicant’s responsible efforts to minimize expenses, and her bankruptcy filing
is a recognized and lawful way to finally resolve outstanding indebtedness and relieve
any ongoing pressure therefrom. 
Applicant obtained financial counseling and debtor education in connection with
her bankruptcy filing, and the Chapter 7 discharge resolved her previously outstanding
debts in a good-faith manner. Her demonstrated solvency going forward, together with
this bankruptcy relief from prior debt, indicate that her financial situation is under control.
Remaining security concerns are therefor mitigated under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d).  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of concern
involves her delinquent debts incurred over the past six years, during periods of
involuntary unemployment of herself and her husband. Considering the expenses
inherent in supporting a family of five, including three teenagers, the total amount of this
debt was relatively modest, and did not reflect irresponsible spending. 
Applicant demonstrated her maturity and responsibility by acknowledging these
debts and taking proper legal action to resolve them through bankruptcy proceedings.
She now has steady employment and sufficient income to meet her living expenses
without incurring further delinquencies, making continuation or recurrence of financial
problems unlikely. The final discharge of her former debts through bankruptcy
eliminates their potential for creating pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress that
could tempt Applicant to abuse her public trust position. 
7
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability
and trustworthiness concerns arising from financial considerations, including her failure
to pay some of her debts over the past six years. Overall, the record evidence leaves no
doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a public trust position.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.rr.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is granted.   
  
 
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
