                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08726 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
H, Drug Involvement, J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines H, J, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 8, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 16, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on the same day. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on December 2, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through C. They were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 9, 2009.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to correctly note that the 
allegations under Guideline E should be numbered paragraph 3 instead of 2, which 
included the allegations under Guideline J. There were no objections and the motion 
and amendment were granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He graduated from high school and attended college 
for four years, but did not earn a degree. He served in the Army for two years and was 
honorably discharged. He has never been married and has no children. He is an 
information assurance analyst for a federal contractor.1  
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 1970 to 2007. He used 
cocaine, with varying frequency, from about 1970 until about October 1996. He used 
heroin, with varying frequency from about 1970 to 2002. He admitted he was addicted 
to drugs in the 1970s and 1980s. He used hypodermic needles up until 1985, when he 
stopped due to the AIDS epidemic. He then used heroin nasally. He admitted he was 
addicted to heroin.2  
 
 In 1998, Applicant moved to a new state and stated he remained drug-free for six 
years. He attended Narcotics Anonymous (NA) and Alcoholics Anonymous. In 2002, 
when he lost his job due to an economic downturn, he moved back to his former area of 
residence, and relapsed by using heroin on two occasions. He stated he had urges to 
use “opiates.” He went to the Veteran’s Administration Hospital and sought treatment. 
He entered a detoxification and substance abuse program. He explained he got 
progressively better in the program. He attended daily group counseling. He got a job in 
2004. He took methadone on a daily basis from June 2002 to February 2005, and 
stayed in the program until 2006. Applicant moved to his current area of residence in 
2006, and while attending a party in September 2007, he used marijuana.3  
1 Tr. 85-90. 
 
2 Tr. 23-33, 44-48, 54. 
 
3 Tr. 29-33, 44-48, 61-63, 84-85. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant admits the criminal conduct alleged in the SOR with some minor 
variances. From 1971 through 1997, he was arrested 16 times. He believes he served a 
cumulative total of approximately four years in jail for various offenses. Some of the 
charges were dismissed or he pled guilty to lesser offenses. The charges included: 
possession of dangerous drugs, petit larceny, possession of stolen property, possession 
of a hypodermic, person not entitled to sign name of another to credit card, fraud, 
fraudulent use of credit card, possession of forged instrument, criminal possession of 
stolen property, unlawful use of credit cards, criminal possession of stolen credit cards, 
grand larceny, false application to bank, failure to appear, obstruction of government 
administration, possession controlled substance, forgery-deed, will, codicil, forgery, 
criminal possession of forged instruments, and attempted criminal possession of 
controlled substance. In some instances, Applicant was charged on different dates with 
the same charges as noted above.4  
 
 Applicant was convicted of the following offenses: person not entitled to sign 
name of another to credit card, sentenced to eight months in jail, suspended; fraud and 
fraudulent use of credit card, sentenced to five years in jail, suspended; petit larceny, 
sentenced to four months in jail and fined; possession of stolen property, sentenced to 
conditional discharge; false statements, sentenced to probation; obstruction of 
government administration, sentenced to 30 days in jail and fine; petit larceny, 
sentenced to 60 days in jail and fine; felony forgery-deed, will codicil, sentenced to one 
year in prison; criminal possession forged instrument, felony, sentenced to one to three 
years in correctional facility; attempted forgery 2nd degree, sentenced to 18 months to 
three years in prison; petit larceny, sentenced to six months in prison; attempted 
criminal possession of controlled substance, criminal solicitation, sentenced to 
conditional discharge; and obstructing government administration, fined.5  
 
 The government conceded that Applicant provided sufficient information in his e-
QIP to put it on notice regarding his arrests, criminal convictions, and bankruptcy 
petition. Applicant admitted that he had many arrests and convictions, but had difficulty 
remembering all of the dates, charges, and sentences. Specifically, the government 
concedes the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.b, 3.c, and 3.d. I find for Applicant on those 
allegations. 
 
 On February 19, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). In response to question 24a, he failed to disclose he 
illegally used heroin and marijuana, in 2002 and 2007, respectively. Applicant’s 
explanation for failing to disclose his heroin use in 2002 was that shortly after he used 
heroin, he participated in a VA substance abuse program and he was prescribed 
methadone. He stated he did not believe his 2002 heroin use was relevant or within the 
scope of the question. He also stated he did not think the heroin use was an issue 
because he had been in a drug program, so he decided not to divulge it. He first stated 
4 Tr. 23-27, 68-78. 
 
5 Tr. 68-78; GE 5. The convictions are presented in chronological order from 1971 through 1997. The 
same charges are repeated where Applicant was arrested on a different occasion.  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
he did not know why he did not divulge his 2007 marijuana use. He admitted he knew 
using marijuana was illegal. He admitted he did not want to disclose his marijuana use 
on his e-QIP because he did not want anyone to know about it. When he was 
interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, in May 2008, he 
was asked about his past drug use. He told the investigator that his last drug use was in 
1997. He intentionally and deliberately concealed the 2002 heroin use and 2007 
marijuana use. He now realizes he should have divulged it. Applicant intentionally and 
deliberately falsified his e-QIP and provided false information during his OPM interview, 
both are felonies in violation of 18 U.S. C. § 1001.6  
 
 Applicant explained that many of his criminal offenses involved stealing people’s 
credit cards and forging signatures to obtain money for drugs. He would steal wallets 
from store dressing rooms and buy gift certificates and make a small purchase so he 
would then receive the remaining amount of the gift certificate in cash. He would also 
steal cash from the wallet, if there was any.  
 
 No one at his place of work, other than his facility security officer, is aware of his 
drug or criminal history. Outside of work, only his mother is aware of his past drug and 
criminal history. His father is deceased.7  
 
 Applicant attends a recovery support group through his church once a week for 
two hours. He has been attending since February 2008.8 
 
 Applicant provided certificates of course completions. He provided a copy of his 
performance appraisal which shows a grade of 3.10 on a 5.0 scale. I have considered 
all of the information provided by Applicant.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
6 Tr. 34-43, 56-58, 62-67;GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. 58-60. 
 
8 Tr. 78-79. 
 
9 AE A, B and C. 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
 
6 
 
 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program as prescribed 
by a duly qualified medical professional; and  
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Appellant has an extensive drug abuse history. He attended drug treatment, but 
relapsed when he used heroin in 2002, and again when he used marijuana in 2007. 
There is no evidence that Applicant was diagnosed by a duly qualified medical 
professional, or licensed clinical social worker, or that a drug treatment program was 
prescribed to him by a qualified medical professional. Therefore, disqualifying conditions 
(d), (e), and (f) cannot be applied. There is sufficient evidence of Applicant’s drug 
abuse, possession of illegal drugs, and possession of drug paraphernalia. Therefore, I 
find disqualifying conditions (a) and (b) apply. There is sufficient evidence to show 
Applicant’s failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. Applicant 
completed an extensive drug treatment program, discontinued using illegal drugs for a 
period of time, and then relapsed by using heroin in 2002 and most recently in 2007, by 
using marijuana. I find disqualifying condition (h) applies.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 
26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
 
7 
 
 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant has a 37-year-history of drug abuse. His most recent use was in 2007, 
after completion of an extensive drug treatment program. Based on Applicant’s past 
history of abuse and relapses, and his most recent use, I cannot find that it is unlikely 
Applicant will abuse illegal drugs again. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
Applicant used marijuana with friends while at a party, after he completed a methadone 
program. I cannot find that he has demonstrated an intent not to use drugs in the future 
or that he has disassociated himself from those that do use drugs. I find mitigating 
condition (b) does not apply. Although Applicant completed a drug treatment program, 
the evidence supports that he had a relapse after the program. No prognosis from a 
duly qualified medical professional was provided. Therefore, I find mitigating condition 
(d) does not apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offense; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Appellant has an extensive criminal history, including numerous felony and 
misdemeanor convictions. Cumulatively, he has served approximately four years in jail. 
I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
 Appellant has an extensive criminal record involving drug offenses, theft, fraud, 
and forgery. Most of his criminal conduct was prior to 1997. Many of the offenses were 
related to his drug abuse and many of the offenses committed were crimes of 
deception. Although he has attempted to put his life on track, he continued to violate the 
law by using drugs, as recently as 2007. He also lied on his security clearance 
application in February 2008, and to an OPM investigator in May 2008, when he was 
interviewed, both felonies. His actions reflect a continuing pattern of criminal conduct 
and his most recent offenses are crimes of deception. I find none of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and specifically considered the following: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional, or community standing. 
 
9 
 
 
Appellant falsified material facts during his May 2008 security interview when he 
told the OPM investigator he had stopped using illegal drugs in 1997, when in fact he 
had used heroin and marijuana in 2002 and 2007, respectively. He also intentionally 
failed to list his recent drug use on his security clearance application. Appellant’s 
personal conduct raises all of the above disqualifying conditions.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur, and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Appellant intentionally lied to the OPM investigator and deliberately concealed 
relevant information about his past drug history on his e-QIP. He did not want anyone to 
know about his background. At his hearing, he stated he did not believe this information 
was relevant. He acknowledged that no one other than his mother and his facility 
security officer, are aware of his drug and criminal history. Considering Applicant’s 
extensive drug and criminal history and his willingness to lie about it, I find none of the 
above mitigating conditions applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
10 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served his country in the 
Army and has taken steps in an attempt to put his life back on track. However, he has a 
long drug and criminal history, with his most recent uses occurring in 2002 and 2007. In 
addition, he lied to the OPM investigator and lied on his e-QIP. He has shown a 
continuing pattern of deception and violating the law. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, 
and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.q:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.b-3.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.e:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
