 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 08-07147 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on January 3, 2007. After reviewing 
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office 
 
1 
 
 
2 
                                                          
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On June 10, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on July 
6, 2009, Applicant admitted all the allegations except allegations 1.b. and 1.h. under 
Guideline B, and allegation 2.b. under Guideline E. He also requested a decision without 
a hearing. In accordance with ¶E3.1.8 of the Directive, however, the government 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on July 30, 2009, and the case was assigned to me September 4, 2009. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 7, 2009, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 5, 2009. The government offered three exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified, but did not offer exhibits or witness testimony. DOHA received the transcript on 
November 12, 2009. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 Prior to the hearing, by memorandum dated July 29, 2009, the government 
amended the SOR as follows:  
 
  Guideline B: The government withdrew factual allegations 1.f. and 1.g. 
 
  Guideline E: The government withdrew the entire paragraph. 
 
Applicant had no objection, and the SOR is so amended. 
 
 At the hearing, the government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). The facts are summarized at 
pages 1 through 10 of the request, and supported by 15 documents pertaining to the 
PRC (identified as Hearing Exhibit I). The documents are included to provide 
elaboration and context for the summary. The facts administratively noticed are limited 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President 
on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and 
they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
to matters of general knowledge not subject to reasonable dispute, and included in 
government reports. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 50 years old, was an enlisted service member in the U.S. Marine Corps 
from 1979 to 1987. He was trained in electronics and satellite communications. Applicant 
is a systems analyst, and has been with the same defense contractor since 1987. He 
has held a top secret security clearance since the late 1980s. As part of a job 
assignment, Applicant lived in Taiwan from 1996 to 1998 and from 2004 to 2006 (GE 1, 
2, 3; Tr. 18-32, 49, 63).  
 
Applicant first married in 1983 and had a stepson and two sons from the marriage. 
They are now 20, 25 and 30 years old. His 25-year-old son has lived and worked in 
China for the past three years. He is aware that his father has a security clearance (GE 
2). Applicant's first wife died in 1995. He married his second wife, a Taiwanese citizen, in 
1996.3 He has two sons from his second marriage, who are 9 and 12 years old. They are 
dual U.S.-Taiwan citizens, and live with their mother in Taiwan. As of 2008, Applicant 
was providing approximately $1,100 per month child support for his sons in Taiwan. He 
divorced his second wife in May 2006. From July to October 2004 and again from 
October 2005 to July 2006, Applicant had an intermittent relationship with a Taiwanese 
woman (GE 1, 2, 3; Tr. 18-32, 49, 63, 71-72).  
 
In June 2006, Applicant met his third and current wife, a Chinese citizen, on an 
internet dating website that focused on Asian women. She holds a Ph.D degree and was 
an English teacher at a Chinese university from 2005 to 2008. He testified that he did not 
believe the school was affiliated with the government; however, in his interrogatory 
response, he indicated that it was. He was required to obtain proof of eligibility to marry 
and a “permission to marry” certificate from the Department of State and the Chinese 
Embassy, and they married in September 2006 in China. His wife remained in China for 
approximately two years. During this period, Applicant traveled to China to visit her 
approximately five times. He also took two trips to Taiwan to see his family there during 
the same period. In June 2008, he traveled to China to assist his wife during the 
immigration process, when she moved to the United States (GE 1, 2, 3; Tr. 18-32, 49, 
63).  
 
Applicant's wife received a conditional residency in June 2008, which will expire in 
June 2010. At that time, he expects her to apply for permanent U.S. residency. She 
teaches the Chinese language at a university in Applicant's state and is pursuing a 
3 Applicant mistakenly stated in his security clearance application that he was married to his second wife 
in 1986. The correct date, according to his testimony and interrogatory response (GE 1; Tr. 19), is 1996. 
 
 
4 
 
 
graduate degree. She became aware of his security clearance status when he informed 
her that his security clearance interview was pending. She is also aware that he works 
on military vehicle communications (GE 2; Tr. 33-35; 50). 
 
 Applicant's wife’s family lives in China. His mother-in-law is a 63-year-old retired 
school teacher who lives in China. His father-in-law is a 65-year-old retired college 
teacher. Applicant testified that he is unaware if the schools were affiliated with the 
Chinese government; however, he indicated they were government owned or operated 
in his interrogatory response. Applicant's brother-in-law is married, 36 years old, and 
works as a free-lance environmental impact consultant to companies. Applicant's sister-
in-law is 32 years old and lives with her parents. She is single, and works as a reporter 
and editor for an independent television station. None of his wife’s family has visited 
Applicant and his wife in the United States (GE 3; Tr. 36-41; 50; 62). 
 
 Applicant's wife’s son is 13 years old. He has been living in China with 
Applicant's mother-in-law and father-in-law, and at times with his father. Applicant and 
his wife have not provided financial support for him. At the end of 2008, Applicant's wife 
coordinated the process to obtain an immigrant visa for her son, and Applicant 
sponsored him. He was expected to arrive in the United States in November 2009 to 
live here permanently with Applicant and his wife. Applicant will also sponsor his step-
son for a permanent visa. Applicant's wife speaks with her son by telephone every two 
to three days, and with her mother and sister about once per week. Applicant has met 
and talked with his mother-in-law and his sister-in-law. Applicant and his wife do not 
have contact often with her father or brother. He believes that his wife will not inherit 
property from her family in China. She does not have financial assets in China (Tr. 22; 
36-48; 59-60). 
 
Applicant keeps his security officer informed of his foreign travel. He is kept 
informed by his company of security and foreign travel issues. He agrees that he is in 
an exploitable position, given his foreign family, but believes that he would “do the right 
thing” and report to his security officer any attempts to exploit him. Applicant testified 
that although he does not think he has been targeted during foreign travel, he has met 
people two or three times “who are just a little too inquisitive, and, usually, you just 
ignore them or don’t even get on the subject at all.”  He has also received emails on his 
personal computer, written In Chinese, that he believes were advertisements, but has 
deleted them without opening them (Tr. 52-56, 65). 
 
Applicant testified that he and his wife do not plan to return to China at the 
present time. However, in his security interview, he stated that he expected that he and 
his wife would visit her family in China. He also stated he is open to the idea of retiring 
to Taiwan or China (GE 2; Tr. 57-58). 
 
Applicant's wife currently holds a Chinese passport. He believes that when she 
becomes a U.S. citizen, she should retain her Chinese passport. In relation to his 
Taiwanese sons’ U.S. and foreign passports, he also testified that, “I don’t know why 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
anybody would want to give up their, you know, born national passport…I pushed 
heavily for my sons to make sure they kept theirs. It just makes sense to me to not give 
up something like that.” “…I always felt that, you know, they should keep those both, 
and keep them both up to date, and active.” (Tr. 73-74). 
 
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
 
 The PRC has an authoritarian government dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party, which ensures that party and state policy guidance is followed.4 
Openness and economic reform have increased, and foreign journalists were allowed 
greater freedom during the most recent Olympic Games. In addition, the United States 
and China have cooperated in some areas, including various law enforcement matters, 
transnational health issues, and threats posed by North Korea’s and Iran’s nuclear 
programs.  
 
 However, according to the State Department’s 2008 Human Rights Report, the 
Chinese government’s human rights record remained poor and worsened in some 
areas. The government engaged in harassment, detention, and imprisonment of those 
perceived as threatening to the government, as well as unlawful killings by security 
forces, physical abuse and torture of prisoners, and denial of fair public trials. 
Authorities monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, text messages, 
and internet and email communications. Security services routinely monitored and 
entered residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
machines. In 2009, the U.S. State Department warned that foreign visitors in China may 
be placed under surveillance, hotel rooms and telephones may be monitored, and 
personal possessions may be searched without the traveler’s knowledge or consent. In 
addition, Americans in China, including those staying with relatives or friends, must 
register with local police when they arrive. 
 
 The PRC possesses large military forces that are transforming into a smaller, 
more mobile high-tech military. Civil-military integration has led to increased use of 
commercial systems in military applications. The PRC has aggressively targeted 
sensitive and protected U.S. economic and militarily critical information subject to export 
control laws. The PRC blends intelligence and non-intelligence assets, relying on covert 
espionage activity by personnel from government ministries, commissions, institutes, 
and military industries independent of the PRC intelligence services, and by targeting 
ethnic Chinese who have access to sensitive information. Americans of Chinese 
ancestry are considered prime intelligence targets. 
 
 Among the record number of countries (108) that engaged in collection efforts 
against the United States in 2005, the PRC was among the most aggressive. Ethnic 
Chinese with U.S. citizenship and/or legal residency have been convicted of procuring 
and exporting or attempting to export sensitive U.S. technology to the PRC. U.S. 
4 The facts cited derive from the documents submitted by Department Counsel, identified as Hearing 
Exhibit I. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have rated China’s espionage and 
industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the security of U.S. technology. The 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission’s 2007 Report to Congress 
concluded that Chinese espionage activities in the United States are so extensive that 
they comprise the single greatest risk to the security of U.S. technologies.5 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised AG.6 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, 
commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  The presence or absence of a 
disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an 
applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case 
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative 
factors addressed under Guideline B. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
5  There is no allegation that Applicant or his family has engaged in economic espionage or attempted to 
violate export controls for the benefit of the PRC. The criminal activity of others is relevant to the extent it 
reflects ongoing efforts by the PRC to target U.S. sensitive technologies. 
 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country 
is not, of itself, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, the country in question must 
be considered and, in particular, whether or not that country targets United States 
citizens to obtain protected information. The PRC is an active collector of such 
information, and so presents a heightened risk of exploitation, manipulation, or 
9 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
coercion.10 Applicant and his wife share living quarters. In addition, as of the date of the 
hearing, he expected his step-son, a Chinese citizen, to arrive from China shortly to 
begin living permanently with him. Applicant sponsored the immigrant application of his 
step-son. Applicant’s actions indicate that he has ties of obligation to his family 
members who are citizens and residents of the PRC. His demonstrated ties of affection 
to his wife, and at least ties of obligation to his Chinese step-son, represent a 
heightened risk of exploitation, and support application of AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d).  
 
 I have also considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 It cannot confidently be predicted that Applicant would not be placed in a position 
that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound by 
strong ties of affection to his wife, a citizen of a country that is one of the most 
aggressive collectors of U.S. sensitive information. Applicant admits that his foreign 
family places him in an “exploitable” position. Applicant has not presented information to 
show that his foreign relatives could not be subject to coercion that would force him to 
choose between their interests and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) cannot be 
applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered Applicant's eight years of 
honorable military service, and his continued service to the government through more 
than 20 years employment with a defense contractor. However, the extent of Applicant's 
10 ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
 
9 
 
 
ties in the United States must be evaluated as well. The record shows that Applicant 
lived outside the United States, in Taiwan, from 1996 to 1998, and again from 2004 to 
2006. He has consistently chosen to seek out relationships with foreign nationals, even 
while he held security clearances. He was married to a Taiwanese citizen for 10 years, 
and had two sons born in Taiwan. Shortly after his divorce, he sought out a dating 
service that focused on Asian women, and within two months of meeting a Chinese 
woman online, he traveled to China and married her. He has strong ties to his current 
wife, who is still a citizen of China, and is willing to live with and support her son, also a 
Chinese citizen. Given China’s aggressive targeting of sensitive information, and 
Applicant's strong ties to Chinese citizens, I cannot confidently conclude that any 
conflict of interest would be resolved in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant’s contacts with his in-laws appear to be casual. However, his 
relationship with his step-son cannot be so characterized. There is a rebuttable 
presumption that applicants have a non-casual relationship with the immediate family of 
a spouse. In regard to Applicant's step-son, the presumption is not rebutted. Applicant 
has shown his willingness to sponsor his step-son’s immigration to the United States, to 
bring him into his own household and to support him here in the United States. His 
actions demonstrate his sense of obligation to his step-son. These facts raise a risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not mitigate Applicant’s situation.  
 
 Applicant receives some mitigation because he informs his security officer about 
his foreign travel and is aware of the risk represented by his foreign family. However, 
Applicant's persistent involvement with foreign citizens, even while holding a security 
clearance, and while acknowledging that such contacts place him in an “exploitable” 
position, raises questions about his judgment. The mitigation under AG ¶ 8(e) is 
insufficient to outweigh the disqualifying conditions. I find against Applicant under 
Guideline B. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
When Applicant began a relationship with his wife, a foreign national, he was 47 
years old. He was a mature, responsible adult who had served 8 years in the Marine 
Corps and had long held a security clearance. Despite his experience and knowledge of 
the obligations imposed on those who hold security clearances, he began and 
continued a relationship with a foreign national, raising serious questions as to his 
trustworthiness and good judgment. The relationship continues and his involvement with 
Applicant's Chinese family has increased. He has sponsored his step-son, a Chinese 
citizen, for immigration into the United States. His step-son is about to take up 
permanent residence with Applicant. Most significantly, Applicant's close and ongoing 
relationship is with foreign nationals of China, a country whose aggressive targeting of 
sensitive United States information poses a heightened risk of exploitation.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.e.  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.g.  WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h.   Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E    WITHDRAWN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
