                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-01978
SSN: ---------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 25, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on April 20, 2005.
 (Government Exhibit 5).  On or about February 20, 2009, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines H and E for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 12, 2009, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on April 13, 2009.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on October 7, 2009, and he failed to submit a response.  The case was assigned
2
to the undersigned for resolution on December 4, 2009.  Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 37 years old and single.  He is employed by a defense contractor
as an Personnel Clerk, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  He
used marijuana with varying frequency, from 1994 to at least the spring of 2007.  During
his personal subject interview, the Applicant identified the time period of his marijuana
use as “1994/02/12" to “2003/09/05" and the frequency of his marijuana use as “lots.”
He also stated that he used marijuana “at least once a week” during that time period, and
admitted to using it “sporadically” after September 2003 to at least the spring of 2007.
(Government Exhibit 6).  
Applicant was charged with Possession of Paraphernalia in September 2003.  He
explained that he was caught with the remains of a marijuana cigarette that he had
smoked the prior weekend.  He was cited and fined.  Three days following this incident,
the Applicant used marijuana again.  (Government Exhibit 6).  
In April 2005, the Applicant completed a security clearance application.
(Government Exhibit 5).  He submitted and re-certified the application in April 2006.
(Government Exhibit 5).  He continued to use marijuana after submitting each of his
security clearance applications.    
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
his personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Applicant admitted with explanations the allegations set forth in the SOR
under this guideline.  
The Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application dated April 3, 2006.
Question 27 of the application asked the Applicant, if since the age of 16 or in the last 7
years, whichever is shorter, had he illegally used any controlled substance, for example,
marijuana, cocaine, etc.  The Applicant listed his use of marijuana from 1994 to
September 2003.  (Government Exhibit 5).  He failed to disclose his marijuana use up to
2006.  (Government Exhibit 6).  The Applicant argues that when he originally filed his
security clearance application in April 2005, the information was accurate.  He failed to
update the information when it was re-submitted in April 2006.  He contends that it was
only after his interview with an investigator that he realized the information was
3
inaccurate.  (Government Exhibit 4).  I do not find this excuse credible.  Common sense
would dictate that you always provide updated information in response to the
government’s inquiries on the application or the application would be of little value.  The
security clearance application is an important document that the Applicant swore
contained accurate information, when it did not.  The Applicant failed to present sufficient
evidence to refute, extenuate or mitigate the above concerns.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16. (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
4
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fidiciary
responsibilities.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question, posed
in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”                                              
5
  CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and/or dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support the
finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H) and that he falsified his security
clearance application (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.
The evidence shows that the Applicant used marijuana for thirteen years from
1994 to at least 2007.  He used marijuana knowing that it was prohibited by law and
clearly prohibited by the Department of Defense.  His most recent use of marijuana
occurred as recently as 2007.  Given his long history of marijuana use, and the use that
occurred after he submitted his security clearance application, the Applicant has failed to
provide persuasive evidence that he has put his illegal drugs use behind him.  This
demonstrates poor judgment and untrustworthiness.  Under the particular facts of this
case, his use of marijuana in 2007 is considered recent in light of the fact that he
continued using marijuana after completing his security clearance application, which
prohibits a favorable determination in this case.       
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 25(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  I find his past use of marijuana to be recent and of security
significance.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement. 
6
With respect to the Applicant’s failure to disclose his marijuana use from 2003 to
2006, on his 2006 security clearance application, I find that it was intentional.  There is
no other plausible explanation for his conduct.
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying Condition 16(a) deliberate
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations,
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities applies.  None
of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  I find that the Applicant deliberately falsified
his security clearance application by concealing his marijuana use.  Consequently, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 37 years old.  I have
considered all of the evidence.  The fact remains, however, that he used marijuana for
thirteen years, from 1994 to at least 2007.  He was not candid in response to questions
concerning his marijuana use and did not disclose this use on his 2006 security
clearance application.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct
set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person
assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and does not meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and under Guideline E (Personal
Conduct).     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.                                                  
                                                                           
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
7
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
