 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
  ) 
                                                                      )   ISCR Case No. 08-11533 
                                                            )                                                                                           
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on or about June 10, 
2008. On May 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 9, 
2009. A Notice of Hearing, setting Applicant’s hearing for October 26, 2009, was issued 
on September 18, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 4 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and called no witnesses. She introduced seven exhibits, which were 
identified and marked as follows: Ex. 1A, Ex. A, Ex. B, Ex. D, Ex. E, Ex. G, and Ex. H. 
Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without objection.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
November 5, 2009, so that Applicant could, if she wished, provide additional information 
for the record. Applicant filed three additional exhibits. Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s post-hearing submissions. I marked the post-hearing submissions 
as Applicant’s Ex. I, Ex. J, and Ex. K, and they were admitted to the record. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on November 3, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant admitted five allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.e., 
1.f., and 1.g.); denied four allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.h., and 1.i.), and offered 
additional information. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact. (SOR; 
Answer to SOR.)  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and employed as a network engineer by a government 
contractor. She is divorced and the custodial parent of two school-aged daughters. In 
2004, she was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice. She is 
pursuing part-time studies and hopes to earn a master’s degree in forensic science. She 
has held a security clearance since 1994. (Ex. 1; Ex. K; Tr. 43-47, 84-85.) 
 
 From 1994 until 2003, Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. military. She 
was honorably discharged in 2003 as an E-6.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 45-46.) 
 
 Applicant married in 1996. Her husband was also in the U.S. military. Two 
daughters were born to the marriage, one in 1997 and the other in 2002. Applicant and 
her husband lived in a home they purchased near their military assignments. (Ex. 1; Ex. 
I, Tr. 32.) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant was offered a job in another state. The employer offered 
Applicant a salary of $60,000 a year, an amount that doubled her existing salary. She 
and her husband discussed the job offer and decided that Applicant should accept it. 
She and the children moved to the other state, while the husband stayed behind to fulfill 
his military duties. In April 2005, Applicant and her husband purchased a home together 
in the new state. The property was secured by two mortgages: a first mortgage of 
approximately $300,000 and a home equity loan of approximately $75,000. The monthly 
payment on the first mortgage was $1,734. The monthly payment on the home equity 
 
3 
 
 
loan was $524. The mortgage loans and monthly payments were based on Applicant’s 
and her husband’s combined incomes. (Ex. 2; Ex. H; Tr. 32-34, 50-51, 81-83.) 
 
 Applicant’s husband sold their home in State A, and the couple realized a profit 
of approximately $146,000. Applicant used approximately $11,000 from the sale as a 
down payment on the second home, which had a purchase price of $375,000. 
Applicant’s husband used the remaining proceeds for unidentified purposes. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant and her husband planned for him to join the family in the new home in 
January 2006. In July 2005, Applicant’s husband came to visit her and the children in 
the new home. He stated that he had a new love interest, wanted a divorce, and had no 
intention to return in January 2006.  He also refused to pay the mortgage on the new 
home. He returned to the state where he and Applicant had previously resided and filed 
for divorce. The divorce was final in July 2006. (Tr. 32-33, 51-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly salary was approximately $3,767. The two mortgage 
payments totaled approximately $2,250 each month. Applicant made the required 
mortgage payments for approximately two and a half years, until December 2007. She 
did not receive child support during that time from her ex-husband. Applicant used her 
credit cards to pay for other household expenses. She listed the property for sale or 
rent, but received no responses. (Ex. H; Tr. 33-34, 52-54.) 
 
 In October 2007, Applicant contacted the creditor holding the first mortgage and 
asked to deed the house back to the creditor. As the creditor suggested, she provided a 
detailed list of her existing financial obligations. Applicant’s ex-husband refused to 
cooperate in authorizing a quick or short sale of the property. The creditor moved to 
foreclose on the property. Applicant briefed her employer’s security officers on her 
situation and provided them with documentation corroborating her communications with 
the creditor. By December 2007, Applicant could no longer pay the mortgages on the 
house and meet her other household and familial expenses. She vacated the property. 
(Ex. H; Tr. 53-55, 80-81.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.f. that the home equity loan of $73,000 had been 
charged off and, as of May 15, 2009, had not been paid. The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.h. that 
the first mortgage of approximately $299,000 had been placed in foreclosure and had 
not been paid as of May 15, 2009. At her hearing and in post-hearing submissions, 
Applicant provided credible testimony and documentation to establish that the property 
had been foreclosed upon, sold at auction, and she did not owe a balance or remainder 
on the loan. Applicant’s documentation established that the property was sold at auction 
on February 12, 2008, for $311,000, and the first mortgage loan of $300,000 was 
satisfied. The second mortgage, a home equity loan for $73,000, remains unsatisified. 
Applicant provided a court order, entered June 18, 2008, but applicable nunc pro tunc to 
February 6, 2008, establishing that the marital property “shall be sold and the parties 
[Applicant and her ex-husband] shall share equally (50/50) in the proceeds or loss as a 
result of the sale.” (SOR; Ex. H; Ex. I; Tr. 60-63.)   
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant has attempted to contact the holder of the home equity loan. Because 
her ex-husband is the primary debtor on the home equity account, the holder of the loan 
will not negotiate with her alone. She intends to continue her efforts to arrange a 
payment plan for her portion of the loan. If her efforts to arrange payment are not 
successful, she intends to seek tax advice about claiming the entire amount as taxable 
income. (Tr. 63-64.)  
  
 During the two and a half years that she was paying the home mortgages and 
was the sole support of her family, Applicant acquired approximately $28,000 in 
delinquent debt. In response to DOHA interrogatories, she provided documentation to 
establish that she had consolidated her debts and made monthly payments to satisfy 
her creditors. In addition to the home mortgage and the home equity loan, the SOR 
alleged seven financial delinquencies that totaled approximately $1,426. Five of the 
alleged delinquencies were medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e.)  
Applicant was not aware of the debts, which arose when her ex-husband dropped her 
from his health insurance. When made aware of the debts in March 2009, she followed 
through with payment, and she provided documentation to corroborate her statements 
that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.e. had been satisfied. She was 
awaiting confirmation that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. had been satisfied. (Answer to 
SOR; Ex. 1A; Ex. A; Ex. B; Ex. D; Ex. E; Tr. 35-37.)     
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate her statement that the debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. had been settled in full as of August 21, 2009. She asserted that 
she had disputed the $154 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i., and the creditor had told her the 
debt was old and closed. She was unable to provide corroborating documentation by 
the time the record closed. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 1A; Ex. G.) 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant was let go when her employer abolished her job. 
She was immediately hired by another government contractor. Her current gross annual 
salary is $72,300.  Her net monthly salary is $3,900, and she receives $752 each month 
in court-ordered child support from her ex-husband. Her total net monthly income is 
$4,652. (Tr. 38, 49, 65, 78-79.) 
 
 Applicant’s fixed monthly expenses include the following: rent, $1,500; groceries, 
$400; clothing, $60; utilities, $205; child care, $400; debt consolidation payment, $514; 
cable and cell phone, $300; and gasoline, $120. In addition, Applicant pays $284 per 
month on her automobile loan, which will be paid in full in six months. (Ex. 3 at 6; Tr. 64-
69.) 
 
 Applicant is current on her state and federal income taxes. She has a savings 
account, which contains about $350, and she has established a 401K account to save 
money for her retirement. Each month she deposits approximately $50 in each 
daughter’s individual savings account. She has no credit cards. She estimates that she 
has a net monthly remainder of $400. (Tr. 64-74.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant is close to her parents and her brother, who provide her and her 
children with strong emotional support. When she served in the military, Applicant 
received financial counseling and also provided financial advice to the individuals she 
supervised. She credited her parents with providing her with a strong sense of financial 
responsibility. (Tr. 74-77.)   
 
 Applicant provided a copy of her 2009 performance evaluation for the record.  
Applicant’s manager noted that even though she was new to the program and a recent 
hire, her work quality, timeliness of delivery, use of resources, and work habits 
consistently exceeded expectations. (Ex. K.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent mortgage debt and 
was unable to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
 
7 
 
 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted financial delinquencies related to a mortgage loan and a 
home equity loan on a home she and her husband purchased together in 2005. 
Additionally, she was responsible for a number of smaller medical and consumer loans 
which she acquired after her husband abandoned the marriage, refused to pay his 
share of the home mortgage and home equity loans, and failed to provide child support 
for his two young daughters who were living with Applicant.  
 
Applicant tried to sell or rent the property. While she contacted the mortgage 
lender and requested assistance in meeting her mortgage obligation, her ex-husband 
refused to authorize a short or quick sale and the lender initiated foreclosure 
proceedings. Eventually, the property was foreclosed upon. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. She is resourceful and responsible. She sought 
assistance from her lender, and she kept her employer’s security officers fully informed 
of the financial difficulties arising from her inability to pay her home mortgage, her home 
equity loan, and her daily living expenses. Additionally, she sought to consolidate her 
consumer loans, and she has consistently made monthly payments to reduce the debt 
she acquired when her husband divorced her and failed to meet his financial obligations 
to her and their children.    
 
 Applicant has learned, through experience, some hard personal and financial 
lessons. She has also acknowledged her financial responsibilities and has made good-
faith efforts to satisfy her creditors. She continues to work to resolve her financial 
obligations. When faced with an unexpected divorce and financial consequences that 
were largely beyond her control, she acted responsibly under the circumstances. The 
circumstances that caused Applicant’s financial delinquencies are unlikely to recur and 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply in this case. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant possesses skills and 
abilities that have been valued by her employers. She has held a security clearance, 
without incident, since 1994. Her financial problems began when her husband 
abandoned the marriage, filed for divorce, refused to pay his share of the mortgages on 
their joint marital property, and failed to fulfill his obligation to support his children. 
Applicant responded to this setback with energy and determination. She attempted to 
rent or sell the marital property. She realized the security implications of her financial 
difficulty, and she kept her employer’s security personnel informed of her financial 
situation. She acted in good faith to meet her financial obligations. I observed Applicant 
carefully at her hearing, and I assessed her credibility. I have no doubt that she will 
honor any legal financial obligations that arise from the unsatisfied home equity loan for 
which she and her ex-husband are equally responsible. I believe it is highly unlikely that 
in the future she will fail to carry out any of the responsibilities of a person entrusted with 
a security clearance and the protection of classified information. I conclude that she is 
not a security risk. 
 
Applicant is a serious and responsible person. She is currently living within her 
means and paying attention to her financial obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance, and I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                      FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.i.:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is   
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
