 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-11287 
 SSN:------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 27, 2008. On 
August 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline H. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 23, 2009; answered it on August 28, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on August 31, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 
21, 2009, and the case was assigned to me on September 28, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on October 5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for October 28, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but presented no 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 4, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old account executive for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since November 2007. He was married in July 2004. 
He has a 4-year-old son and a son born two weeks before the hearing (Tr. 30). He has 
never held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at age 15 (GX 2 at 6). He was arrested for 
possession of marijuana at age 17, while he was in high school. He continued to use 
alcohol and marijuana through high school and college. Between 1987 and 1993, while 
he was in college, he used marijuana three to four days a week (Tr. 33). He used 
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), ecstasy, and psychedelic mushrooms ten to fifteen 
times, cocaine five or six times (GX 2 at 8-9), and nitrous oxide twice (GX 4 at 26; Tr. 
34-35). After graduating from college, he continued to purchase and use marijuana 
three or four times a week until June 2000 (Tr. 37) 
 
Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) in 1988 and 1991 
(GX 5 at 1-2). In March 2000, while he was pursuing a master’s degree, he sought 
treatment because he was concerned about his pattern of heavy drinking. He was 
arrested for his third DUI in June 2000 (GX 5 at 3; Tr. 27). His doctor, a psychiatrist 
specializing in addiction treatment (Tr. 39), prescribed medications for anxiety (GX 2 at 
5), and recommended that Applicant enter a residential alcohol and drug rehabilitation 
center (Tr. 39-40).  
 
Applicant voluntarily entered a residential alcohol and drug rehabilitation center in 
June 2000. At the time, he was consuming 16 to 24 beers and smoking one or two 
marijuana cigarettes daily (GX 4 at 6). He was evaluated by a social worker and a 
medical doctor (GX 4 at 9), and he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and 
cannabis dependence. He dropped out of graduate school in order to complete the 
rehabilitation program (Tr. 28). He completed the program in November 2000 and 
received a good prognosis, contingent on complying with the aftercare plan, which 
included regular attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings (GX 4 at 4). He 
completed his graduate studies and received a master’s degree in information 
technology in August 2001 (GX 1 at 6; Tr. 28-29). He continued to see his psychiatrist 
twice a week until January 2002, when he moved to another state (Tr. 42). 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant stopped consuming alcohol and using marijuana when he entered the 
rehabilitation program in June 2000. He attended AA meetings regularly until around 
2005 (GX 2 at 8). He and his wife, also a recovering alcoholic, now attend AA meetings 
less frequently, but they have a core group of friends in recovery and they support each 
other (GX 3 at 8; Tr. 29). Applicant currently is a sponsor for another AA member (Tr. 
43). He regularly reads the “Big Book” published by AA (Tr. 51).  
  
 Applicant resumed his marijuana use in November 2005. He is an avid mountain 
biker, and he purchased and used small amounts of marijuana while mountain biking 
with friends. He stopped using marijuana in December 2007, when he learned his 
employer wanted him to obtain a security clearance (GX 2 at 8). He estimated he used 
marijuana 35 to 40 times between November 2005 and December 2007 (Tr. 29).  
 
Applicant testified that his wife expressed concerns about his marijuana use. In 
December 2007, he realized his marijuana use “wasn’t worth it.” He was concerned 
about the impact of his marijuana use on his family, and he knew his marijuana use was 
going in a direction that could get worse (Tr. 49). He continues to see the mountain 
bikers with whom he used marijuana, but he no longer rides with them (Tr. 48). He 
testified that marijuana use is not a part of his life and it will never be a part of his life 
again (Tr. 30). 
 
Applicant disclosed his DUI convictions, treatment for alcoholism, and drug use 
on his security clearance application (GX 1 at 22-27, 29). During an interview with a 
security investigator in April 2008, Applicant told the investigator that he enjoyed using 
marijuana, and that it helped him to relieve stress. He also told the investigator that he 
is not ashamed of his illegal drug use, but he believes that it is not socially acceptable 
(GX 2 at 9).  
 
Applicant is not currently receiving any counseling for anxiety, but he continues 
to take anxiety medications that are prescribed and monitored by his physician (GX 2 at 
9). He visits with his physician, a general practitioner, every six months (Tr. 54). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
 
4 
 
 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from 1987 to June 2000 and from 
November 2005 to December 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a); he purchased marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b), 
he used LSD, ecstasy, cocaine, and mushrooms between 1988 and 1993 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-
1.f); he used nitrous oxide in 1992-1993 (SOR ¶ 1.g); and he was arrested and charged 
 
5 
 
 
with possession of marijuana in 1987 (SOR ¶ 1.i). It also alleges he was treated from 
June to November 2000 for cannabis dependence (SOR ¶ 1.i). 
 
 The SOR does not allege any disqualifying conditions under Guideline J (Alcohol 
Consumption). I have considered the evidence of Applicant’s alcohol dependence and 
alcohol abuse for the limited purposes of assessing his credibility; deciding which 
adjudicative guidelines are applicable; evaluating the evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, and changed circumstances; considering whether he has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; and as part of my whole-person analysis. See ISCR Case No. 
03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
The concern under Guideline H is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse of 
a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 
24(a)(1).  
 
The evidence raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”;  
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug 
dependence. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (d), the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
 
6 
 
 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence 
shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 Applicant last used marijuana in December 2007, more than two years ago. Two 
years is “a significant period of time” within the meaning of this mitigating condition. 
Several factors tend to negate application of this mitigating condition. Applicant 
previously abstained from marijuana use for more than five years and then relapsed in 
November 2005, which tends to show that a two-year period of abstinence is not 
sufficient to demonstrate rehabilitation. His decision to stop using marijuana was 
motivated in part by his desire to obtain a security clearance, and not because of any 
legal, moral, or ethical considerations.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s decision to stop using marijuana in December 
2007 was also motivated by his wife’s disapproval, his increased family responsibilities, 
concern about the impact of his marijuana use on his family, and his realization that he 
was going down a path of substance abuse similar to what he previously experienced. 
He is more mature, self-aware, and committed to his professional career than he was in 
December 2007. He has twice experienced the downward slide of his lifestyle caused 
by substance abuse, and he does not desire to repeat that experience. In addition to his 
two-year period of abstinence from marijuana use, he has abstained from alcohol for 
more than nine years. After weighing all the evidence, I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) is 
established.  
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). The evidence establishes AG ¶ 
26(b)(3), but not AG ¶ 26(b)(1), (2), or (4). 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition is not fully 
established. Applicant satisfactorily completed an extensive and intense drug and 
alcohol rehabilitation program. It was recommended by his psychiatrist, but not 
“prescribed.” He complied with the aftercare requirements. He received a favorable 
prognosis in November 2000, but he has since relapsed. He has not received any drug 
treatment or prognosis since his relapse.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He presented himself at the hearing 
as intelligent, articulate, candid, and sincere. He fully disclosed his record of substance 
abuse in his security clearance application. His disclosures in his application and during 
subsequent security interviews and DOHA interrogatories are the only evidence 
supporting the allegations in the SOR. His candor and sincerity during the security 
clearance process are strong indicators that he is trustworthy and reliable.  
 
 Applicant has suffered from anxiety for many years, and his substance abuse 
was due in large part to his efforts to self-medicate his anxiety. He has learned to 
control his anxiety through prescribed medication and counseling.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline H, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person and my obligation to 
decide doubtful cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns based on drug involvement. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
