1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-10712
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-86) on May 25, 2008.
On April 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline C
(Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In a response notarized on May 6, 2009, Applicant admitted one of the two
allegations set forth in the SOR under Guideline C and both allegations raised under
Guideline B. He also declined a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of
Relevant Material (FORM), dated September 2, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on
September 10, 2009, but failed to respond to its contents. On November 3, 2009, the
Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. It was
assigned to another administrative judge on November 3, 2009, then reassigned to me
 FORM at 2-9; see supporting documents I - XVI.      1
 FORM at 4.      2
 FORM at 3; Message to the Congress of the United States, dated Mar. 11, 2008.      3
 FORM at 5.      4
 FORM at 6.      5
 FORM 6-7.      6
2
on December 7, 2009, because of case load considerations. Based on a review of the
case file and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security
concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old senior software engineer who has worked for the same
government contractor since May 2008. He has over a decade of experience in his field
and has earned a master’s degree in engineering. Married, he is the father of two
children. This case involves allegations that Applicant exercises dual citizenship and
possesses a foreign passport. Additionally, foreign influence concerns are alleged
concerning Applicant’s mother, a sister, and a brother, all of whom are citizens and
residents of Iran. In choosing an administrative determination without a hearing,
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. Because his submissions are brief, the
facts of record are limited. 
Administrative notice is taken with regard to Iran.  Specifically, it is noted that1
Iran is a theocratic republic. The United States (U.S.) has not had diplomatic or
consular relations with Iran since November 1979. Iran was designated as a state
sponsor of terrorism in January 1984 and remains the most active state sponsor of
terrorism.  In March 2008, it was officially noted that “the actions and policies of the2
government of Iran are contrary to the interests of the United States in the region and
pose a continuing unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign
policy, and economy of the United States.”  Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons3
and other weapons of mass destruction concern the United States.  Over the years, it4
has sought to illegally obtain United States military equipment and other sensitive
technology.  It has a poor and worsening record with regard to human rights, including5
the monitoring of the social activities of its citizens, politically motivated abductions,
arbitrary arrests, a lack of judicial independence, and torture. 6
In 1967, Applicant was born in Iran. In 1986, he immigrated to Canada, a
constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary government and strong democratic
traditions. He continued with his education and became a Canadian citizen in 1994. He
completed his education at the master’s level in 1996. The following year, he accepted
a new position located in the United States (U.S.) and moved to this country. In 1998,
he married a U.S. citizen and, in 2005, he became a U.S. citizen. 
 The pension fund is akin to Social Security. Applicant has no idea of his pension’s current value. He      7
recognizes that it may generate minimal retirement income, but would like to “maintain its viability as an
addition to his retirement when that day comes.” Item 6 at 6.
 Item 6 at 4.      8
 Id. at 5-6; FORM at 13.      9
3
Today, Applicant is a dual citizen of both the U.S. and Canada. He has not
returned to Iran since his emigration from that country. He maintains his Canadian
citizenship in order to remain eligible for benefits from the Canadian Pension System,
into which he contributed for over a decade while living and working there.  He may7
return to Canada upon retirement.  Applicant has traveled extensively through Europe,8
with the vast majority of his travel taking place before 2005. Shortly before becoming a
U.S. citizen in 2005, he renewed his Canadian passport. It was valid through January
10, 2010. Through at least May 2009, when he responded to the SOR, Applicant had
not used his Canadian passport since becoming a U.S. citizen. In his SOR response,
he noted his willingness to renounce his dual-citizenship and surrender his Canadian
passport.
Applicant has two older brothers. One is a citizen and resident of Canada, while
the eldest brother remains a citizen and resident of Iran. Applicant maintains regular
contact with his Canadian brother through monthly telephone conversations and
conducts weekend visits every couple of years. His contact with his eldest sibling, a
physician who is now over 60 years of age, is minimal. They speak by telephone about
once a year. The two last visited in person during his brother’s visit to the U.S. in 2004,
following a 2003 visit convened in Europe.  There is no information as to whether this9
brother receives or may receive any form of state pension, subsidy, or benefit, or has
ever worked for a foreign government.
Applicant also has a sister who is a resident and citizen of Iran. She is his eldest
sibling and nearly 20 years older than Applicant. They last saw each other at a family
reunion in Canada in 2006. Prior to this visit, they visited during a trip to Europe in
2002. She is retired, but there are no facts regarding her former profession except a
note that, like the rest of her family, she has no affiliation with any government or
foreign country. There is no information as to whether she receives a state pension,
subsidy, or other government benefit. Applicant’s sister resides with their mother, who is
in her late 70s. Consequently, Applicant and his sister converse by telephone whenever
he calls his mother in Iran, which is about three or four times a year.
In 2002, Applicant saw his mother for the first time in 17 years. They last saw
each other during the 2006 family reunion. In the interim, they maintained occasional
contact by telephone. Applicant’s mother is also retired, but there is no information
regarding her former profession or whether she receives any form of state subsidy,
benefit, or retirement. 
 Response to the SOR, dated May 6, 2009.      10
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      11
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      12
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      13
4
None of Applicant’s relatives have been approached by any foreign agents or
interests regarding Applicant, his work, or his current application for a security
clearance. There has been no indication of any hostile interest in either Applicant or his
family members. Applicant stated that his family members “have no government ties
and [he sees] no reason for their existence to influence [his] life here in the United
States where [he owns] a home and [has] established [him]self with a wife of 10 years
and two young children.”10
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and
commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” An administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is11
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion12
is on the applicant.  13
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      14
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      15
 Id.      16
5
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security14
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any15
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to16
deny an individual a security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an
applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a
clearance.
Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) are the
most pertinent AGs to the case. Applicable conditions that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference
Under Guideline C, “[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.” Here, Applicant maintained a Canadian passport which only recently expired
and which, presumably, he still possesses. He continues to maintain dual citizenship
with Canada to retain his investment in its state pension fund and to maintain the option
of returning to Canada upon retirement. Such facts raise security concerns under
foreign preference disqualifying condition (FP DC) AG ¶ 10(a) (“exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1)
possession of a current foreign passport; . . . (3) accepting educational, medical,
retirement, or social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; . . . (5) using
a foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country. . . .”).
Arguably, FP DC AG ¶ 10(d) (“any statement or action that shows allegiance to a
6
country other than the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce
United States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship”) also applies with
regard to Applicant’s exercise of dual citizenship. Consequently, the burden shifts to
Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant possesses a Canadian passport. He has not used it since becoming a
U.S. citizen and he has expressed his willingness to surrender it. The passport expired
on January 10, 2010. Therefore, it is no longer current, as contemplated under AG ¶
10(a) (1). Foreign preference mitigating condition (FP MC) AG ¶ 11(e) (“the passport
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated”) also applies to the extent the passport became invalid upon expiration and
there is no evidence that it has been renewed.
With regard to Applicant’s statement that he might return to Canada upon
retirement, security concerns could be raised by the inference that Applicant’s
allegiance to Canada is superior to his allegiance to the United States. Such an
inference would give rise to AG ¶ 10(d), noted above. Applicant, however, expressed
his willingness to renounce his dual citizenship, raising FP MC AG ¶ 11(b) (“the
individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship”).  
Remaining at issue is Applicant’s eligibility for a Canadian pension, regarding
which he has not expressed a willingness to renounce. The guideline does not
distinguish between the intention to accept and the actual acceptance of foreign
pension benefits. In both circumstances, the individual has an ongoing financial tie to a
foreign country. Moreover, while Applicant confirmed that the amount at issue is not
significant, the guideline does not discount potentially nominal sums and the facts fail to
reveal sufficient information regarding his overall financial situation. While this future
interest may be a nominal consideration in his overall retirement planning, it remains
sufficiently valid to raise security concerns which Applicant failed to mitigate. Security
concerns remain unmitigated.
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
Guideline B states that “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in
a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest.” The guideline further states that adjudication under this section should
consider the identity of the country at issue and “such considerations as whether the
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” In this case, the country at issue with
regard to Guideline B and Applicant’s relatives abroad is Iran. The record is replete with
information regarding Iran, with which the U.S. has been on strained terms for over 30
years. Iran was designated as a state sponsor of terrorism in January 1984 and
remains an active sponsor of terrorism. It has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military
equipment and sensitive technology. Consequently, the situation presented demands
heightened scrutiny.
 ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002).      17
 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003).      18
7
The facts presented emphasize the minimal contact Applicant has with those
family members residing in Iran who are at issue in the SOR, specifically his mother,
sister, and his eldest brother. While contact may be infrequent, there is a rebuttable
presumption that an applicant’s contacts with immediate family members are not
casual  and that the necessary Guideline B inquiry concerns both ties of affection and17
ties of obligation.  18
Applicant speaks on the telephone with his mother and sister about every three
or four months. While they did not visit for nearly 17 years, Applicant resumed visits
with his mother in 2002. He saw both his mother and sister at a family reunion in
Canada in 2006. While he only speaks with his elder brother about once a year, they
visited together in 2003 and 2004. Such facts raise Foreign Influence Disqualifying
Condition (FI DC) AG ¶ 7(a) (“contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion”) and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) (“connections to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information.”).
Applicant failed to provide any information regarding Iran in response to the
FORM. Moreover, while Applicant may consider his relationships with his Iranian
relatives casual, his request for a determination on the written record preempts further
inquiry into his family dynamics and precludes substantiation of his assessment.
Further, he failed to elaborate on his family members’ lives in Iran, for example,
whether they received or are eligible to receive state benefits. He also offered scant
facts regarding his present life in the U.S., noting little more than the facts that he
immigrated to the U.S. in 1997, that he is employed in the U.S., that his wife and
children are U.S. citizens, and that he owns his own home. 
Consequently, Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition (FI MC) AG ¶ 8(a) (“the
nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the position or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”), FI MC AG ¶ 8(b) (“there is no conflict of interest, either because of the
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest”), and FI MC AG ¶ 8(c) (“contact or communication
with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation”) do not apply. None of the remaining
8
mitigating conditions apply. Because Applicant failed to address the concerns related to
the security issues raised, security concerns remain unmitigated.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Although the facts of record are few, multiple factors speak in his favor. He is a
mature man who left his family and Iran as a young man to start a new life abroad. He
earned a master’s degree in Canada and has traveled extensively. Married, he is
raising two U.S.-born children and owns a home in the U.S. 
Multiple facts, however, also speak against Applicant. In choosing an
administrative determination, Applicant relied on a written record which was less than
comprehensive. There are insufficient facts regarding Applicant’s current investments
and holdings to gauge his need for a Canadian pension. While he expressed a
willingness to renounce his Canadian citizenship, there is no evidence he is equally
willing to renounce his right to state pension payments in the future. Aside from his
current financial situation, there are few facts concerning Applicant’s roots in either his
present community or in the U.S. 
Similarly, insufficient facts are presented with regard to his relatives in Iran, the
depth of their familial relationships, or his sense of loyalty to them. Other questions
remain unaddressed, obviating the mitigation of security concerns regarding foreign
influence. Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information and
9
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. There
are no facts bringing Applicant’s loyalty or commitment to the U.S. into question. His
reliance on a less than comprehensive written record leaves significant questions
unresolved under both applicable guidelines, either of which are sufficient to find
security concerns are left unmitigated. Consequently, he failed to meet his burden of
persuasion. Therefore, I conclude it is not clearly consistent with national security to
grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
