1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-11870
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on August 28,
2008. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F on August
21, 2009. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 26, 2009. She answered
the SOR in writing on September 1, 2009, and requested a hearing before an
GE 1; Tr. 16.1
GE 1; Tr. 15-16, 20.2
Tr. 16-29.3
2
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on September 8, 2009. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 18, 2009, and I received the case
assignment on October 8, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 19, 2009,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 3, 2009. The government
offered five exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received and admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She did not submit any exhibits.
The record closed on November 3, 2009. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing
(Tr.) on November 12, 2009.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
At the hearing, Applicant indicated she received the hearing notice less than 15
days before the hearing. (Tr. 9.) I advised Applicant of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the
Directive to receive the hearing notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice. (Tr. 9.) 
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the
SOR. Her admissions are included as part of my findings of fact discussed below.
Applicant, who is 25 years old, works as a security analyst for a Department of
Defense contractor. She began her employment in August 2008.   1
Applicant graduated from high school in 2002. She plans to start college through
online classes in January 2010. Approximately four years ago, Applicant began a
relationship with a man with whom she lived for several years. They never married, but
she has a two-year-old daughter from this relationship. Applicant ended the relationship
in January 2009. Applicant now lives in an apartment with two co-workers and her
daughter.2
In 2006, Applicant opened two credit card accounts with one bank, which she
used to pay her boyfriend’s legal bills. He agreed to pay these charges, but did not. She
also had a bank account at this same banking institution. She opened two other store
accounts and had a car loan. Applicant worked as a sales representative until January
2008. From January 2008 until August 2008, she was unemployed. She did not receive
unemployment benefits. During her unemployment, her boyfriend paid her normal living
expenses, but did not make any payments on her credit accounts.  3
GE 3; Tr. 16-29.4
Applicant is paid weekly. Eight months of the year, she receives four paychecks. Four months of the year,5
she receives five paychecks. I have calculated her monthly income on the basis of four weeks a month. See
Tr. 29.
GE 3; Tr. 31-35.6
GE 3; Tr. 27, 35-39.7
GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 20-27.8
3
Applicant’s car broke down in late 2007 or 2008. She did not have the money to
pay for the car repairs and for her monthly car payment. She learned that a class action
lawsuit with the car company was proceeding through the courts because of mechanical
problems like hers. She asked the car company to repair the car, but it declined,
indicating it would repay her if the lawsuit settled and payments were required. Based
on advice from her father, she voluntary returned the car to the car company. The car
company treated this as a voluntary repossession.4
Applicant’s monthly net pay is $1,669.  She does not receive any child support5
from her daughter’s father. Her monthly expenses include $433 for rent, $400 for food,
$200 for utilities, $75 for cell phone, $100 for transportation, and $100 for entertainment.
At the time of the hearing, Applicant’s former boyfriend provided child care for their
daughter. She paid him $200 a month for child care and she purchased food for her
daughter while in his care. Applicant decided to end this arrangement. She enrolled her
daughter in a child care program, which began a week after the hearing. This program
included three meals a day and cost $163 a week, for a total monthly cost of $652. She
plans to pay this expense with the $200 child care expense she paid her former
boyfriend and half of her monthly food expenses. Applicant lives paycheck to
paycheck.   6
Applicant pays her current monthly expenses. Since she does not have any
additional funds each month, she has not paid any of the debts listed in the SOR. In
May 2009, she applied for a government program to help pay her child care costs. She
expects to receive financial assistance early in 2010, which would eliminate her monthly
child care costs. She plans to use this extra income to repay her debts. She has not
consulted with a financial counseling agency. She is, however, working with a friend on
her budget, looking for ways to cut small expenses. Since ending her relationship with
her daughter’s father, her monthly expenses have stabilized.7
Applicant acknowledged all the debts listed in the SOR. She admitted to two
charge accounts and one account with the same bank. The bank sold these accounts to
collection agencies. Through the selling process, the account numbers changed and
one additional account with this bank appeared on the credit reports. Applicant has not
challenged the validity of the additional account or otherwise provided information which
reflects that the account is not hers.  8
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt and has been unable to
pay these obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), mitigation may occur when
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose
about two years ago and are ongoing. This mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s financial
problems arose during her relationship with her daughter’s father, who failed to repay
Applicant for debts incurred on his behalf, and when she was unemployed for eight
months in 2008. Her debts arose from circumstances beyond her control. She lacked
the financial resources to pay her debts when she was unemployed, and still lacks
income to pay her past due debts. Thus, her debts remained unresolved. I find this
mitigating condition has some applicability. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received financial counseling, nor has she
developed a payment plan which would resolve her delinquent debts. While her current
monthly expenses are paid, she lacks the financial ability to pay her past debts. These
6
mitigating conditions are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) mitigating conditions are
not applicable in this case.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of denying a security clearance to applicant under the
whole person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of a grant. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems began when she developed a relationship with her daughter’s father.
She obtained credit cards to help pay his legal fees, believing that he would pay the
debt. In 2008, she did not work for eight months. Although her boyfriend paid living
expenses, she did not have any income to pay her bills, including her debts. She
returned to work in August 2008 and ended the relationship with her daughter’s father in
January 2009. For the last year, she has been able to pay her current expenses, but
lacks sufficient income to pay her past debts, even the small debts. A friend is helping
her evaluate her monthly expenses and look for ways to decrease her spending. She
applied for a government program to help with child care expenses, and if accepted, will
use this money to pay her past debts. At this time, Applicant has not shown a track
record for payment of her past debts. Under the Directive, a sponsored Applicant can
apply for her security clearance one year from the date of this decision. If she can show
7
that she has developed and complied with a debt payment plan, she would be a good
candidate for being granted a security clearance, assuming no other issues of a security
concern arise.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her finances
under Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
