KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s finding that Applicant deliberately omitted information from his
application was supported by substantial record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 08-11152.a1
DATE: 01/07/2010
DATE: January 7, 2010
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11152
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 10, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On September 22, 2009, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s factual findings are
based on substantial record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.
“Q: [At the time you completed the SCA] you were a party to a civil action, is that right?  A: I didn’t understand1
that answer or that question that way.  Q: How did you understand it?  A: I did not understand that what . . . the bank had
brought was a civil action against me.  I understood that what the bank was attempting to do was recover their loan.  I
thought that I had the opportunity to prove my innocence and the results of that would determine whether it was a civil
action or a foreclosure.”  Tr. at 53.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant retired from the U.S.
military as an 0-6 following a 30 year career.  He is a naval architect for a government contractor and
is also president of a consulting firm.  He held a Top Secret clearance while in the military.
In 2005 Applicant refinanced the mortgage on his primary residence.  He also mortgaged an
abutting parcel of land upon which he intended to build a house.  He intended to sell that house for
a profit.  In the latter half of 2006, Applicant failed to make payments on the mortgage for his
primary residence.  The bank filed a complaint against Applicant, seeking foreclosure of the
property.  Applicant and the bank litigated various issues related to the foreclosure, an appeal of a
summary judgement motion eventually making its way to the state supreme court.  However,
ultimately a trial court ordered foreclosure, although Applicant was able to redeem the property by
obtaining another mortgage.  In 2007, the bank sought foreclosure of the mortgage on the second
property.  Issues relating to this matter were litigated in court.  
When completing his security clearance application (SCA) Applicant answered “no” to three
questions.  One inquired as to whether, in the previous seven years, he had ever been over 180 days
delinquent on any debts.  Another asked whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any
debt.  A third asked if, in the previous seven years, he had been a party to a civil court action.  At the
hearing, Applicant advised the Judge that he had answered “no” to the first two questions because
he believed he would be successful in contesting the foreclosure actions.  Regarding the third
question, Applicant stated that he did not realize at the time he completed the SCA that the
foreclosures were civil court actions.  
In concluding that Applicant had deliberately omitted the information about his debts and the
lawsuits, the Judge considered Applicant’s status as a retired officer with prior experience in
applying for security clearances.  She also considered the extent to which Applicant’s claims not to
know that the foreclosures were civil court actions lacked credibility.  “Although Applicant is not
a lawyer, it is simply not credible for him to claim that the results of the lawsuit would determine
whether it was a civil action or a foreclosure for purposes of whether he was required to disclose the
ongoing legal proceedings[.]”  Decision at 11.    1
In his appeal brief Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact.  He provides detailed
information concerning his reasons for obtaining the mortgages in question and concerning the
circumstances of the litigation which ensued.  Additionally, Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding
that his omissions on the SCA were deliberate.  The Board has considered the Judge’s discussion
of Applicant’s intent and concludes that it is sustainable.  In addition to the factors referenced in the
previous paragraph, the Board also notes record evidence that Applicant, a graduate of a U.S.
military academy, of a distinguished civilian university, and of his service’s War College, possessed
a level of education more than sufficient to enable him to understand the questions at issue.  In
addition, the record includes three exhibits, two being decisions by the state supreme court and
another an order of foreclosure by a trial court.  These documents contain findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and appropriate orders from the courts.  They identify the bank as plaintiff and
Applicant as defendant.  Anyone a party to proceedings such as those described in the aforesaid
documents would reasonably have understood himself to have been involved in a civil court action.
Even if the Judge’s extensive findings contain errors or omissions, they are not likely to have
affected the outcome of the case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material
findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21025 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct.
9, 2007). 
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable on this record.  Decision
at 13.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
