 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 08-12161 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
On September 8, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (eQIP). On June 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On July 13, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On September 25, 2009, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on September 29, 2009. Applicant received the 
FORM on October 6, 2009, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. On or about October 20, 2009, Applicant submitted four 
exhibits to which Department Counsel had no objection. On or about November 13, 
2009, Applicant submitted another document without Department Counsel’s objection. 
On November 17, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. After receiving the file, I 
marked Applicant’s exhibits as AE A through E and entered them into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
Paragraphs 1.a and 1.b.   
  
 Applicant is 46 years old and married to her second husband. She has been 
enrolled in college from April 2007 to the present. From February 2001 to December 
2001, she worked for the federal government as a mail assistant. She then obtained a 
position with a federal contractor for whom she worked until September 2003. From 
October 2003 to September 2007, she owned a hair salon. After a six-month period of 
unemployment, she obtained a position with a private company. In September 2008, 
she completed an e-QIP and started her current position as an administrative specialist 
with a federal contractor. (Item 5.) 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant and her husband purchased a $554,000 home with a 
primary mortgage of approximately $439,000 and a second mortgage for $115,000. 
(Item 8 at 13-14.) Credit bureau reports (CBR) dated September 2008 and June 2009 
report that both mortgages became delinquent in late 2007 or early 2008, and 
apparently went into foreclosure.1 (Items 7; 8; 9.)  
 
  In her Answer, Applicant stated that she attempted to work with the mortgage 
company to modify the loans for several months after she closed her business in 
September 2007 and was unemployed. A customer service representative advised her 
not to pay the mortgages until the company sent her a loan modification. (Item 4.) 
According to a July 2009 letter from her lawyer, Applicant contacted him about 
modifying her mortgages in November 2008. (Item 4.) He noted that Applicant’s income 
and business were adversely affected by the economic downturn and her husband’s 
inability to work for a period of time because of a knee injury. He affirmed that Applicant 
unsuccessfully attempted to work out a loan modification with the mortgagor. (Id.) After 
                                                          
1Applicant did not disclose that her mortgages were delinquent in the September 2008 e-QIP. In 
her Answer to the SOR, she stated that she did not know they were delinquent because her husband paid 
the family bills. (AE A.) Although the government did not raise a falsification security concern under the 
Personal Conduct Guideline in the SOR, this information may be considered in the whole-person 
analysis. 
  
 
3 
 
 
reviewing the file, he asserted that the lender engaged in “predatory and deceptive 
lending practices” and “placed this borrower into a non-affordable loan putting them at 
jeopardy of losing their home.” (Id.) In January 2009, Applicant filed an Official Qualified 
Written Request to restructure the two mortgages. (Item 6.) On August 27, 2009, 
Applicant executed a loan modification agreement, in which the second mortgage was 
released and merged into the first after she paid $1,000. (AE B.) The total mortgage 
amount was modified to $535,700 and required three initial monthly payments of 
$4,129, beginning on September 6, 2009, and monthly payments of $3,218 thereafter. 
(Item 8.) Applicant submitted evidence that she made the first payment of $4,129 on 
August 31, 2009, and that the mortgage company released the second mortgage. (Item 
8, AE E.)      
 
 On January 29, 2009, Applicant entered into an agreement with a credit 
counseling service to consolidate $46,600 of debt, including her husband’s credit card 
bills, through monthly payments of $1,192 beginning in February 2009. (Item 6.) 
Applicant’s March 2009 family budget reflected a net monthly income of $8,040, 
expenses of $2,540, a $4,700 mortgage payment, and the $1,192 debt repayment, 
leaving a negative $392. (Item 6.) The revised mortgage payment eliminates the 
negative balance at the end of the month.   
 
 Applicant’s student loans total approximately $28,641 and are deferred until 
2011. (Item 7 at 2; AE A.) In January 2008, she obtained a $4,250 student loan. 
Between August and December 2008, she borrowed another $8,500.  
  
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s two mortgage loans were past due debts and 
raised security concerns. The status of each debt is as follows:  
 
1. (¶ 1.a) noted that Applicant was $9,000 past due on the $115,000 second 
mortgage. This mortgage was satisfied and released in August 2009. This 
debt is resolved.   
 
2. (¶ 1.b) alleged that Applicant was $80,000 past due on the $439,000 first 
mortgage. This mortgage was modified and restructured at the end of August 
2009.  She presented evidence that she made the first required payment 
under the new loan. The mortgage is being resolved. 
 
 Applicant stated in her Answer that she does not believe that she is living above 
her means. She paid off two of her charge cards and consolidated her husband’s credit 
card debt through the credit counseling services.2 With the large reduction of her 
monthly mortgage payment and her monthly monitoring of the family bills (instead of her 
husband), she believes her finances are resolving. (AE A.) 
 
 
 
                                                          
2The SOR does not raise any security concerns regarding her credit cards. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC), which are 
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG & 19 sets forth two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
potentially disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 After closing her business in September 2007, Applicant was unable to resolve 
her delinquent mortgages until August 2009. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline, three of which may be applicable in this case: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant closed her business in September 2007 and was unemployed for six 
months. According to her attorney, she experienced financial problems as a 
consequence of the poor economic climate and her husband’s knee injury. Those 
circumstances were conditions beyond her control. Sometime in 2008, she attempted to 
renegotiate her mortgages, but ultimately needed to hire a lawyer in November 2008 
 
6 
 
 
(albeit after completing an e-QIP) after her individual attempts failed. However, within 
two months of closing her business and becoming unemployed, she decided to attend 
college and assumed additional debt of approximately $13,000 of student loans, which 
was a decision within her control. Thus, AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application. Applicant 
obtained credit counseling and entered into a repayment plan for debts not included in 
the SOR in January 2009. The $1,192 monthly repayment is included in her budget. Her 
new loan modification agreement reduced her monthly mortgage payment from the 
March 2009 amount of $4,700 to $4,129 through November 2009; thereafter, it will be 
reduced to $3,218, giving her a remainder of $1,400 in her budget. This amount should 
be sufficient to manage payments on her student loan, which becomes due in 2011. 
These actions warrant an application of AG & 20(c) and AG & 20(d) because they 
indicate that the mortgages are being paid and resolved through her good-faith efforts to 
modify the loans.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 46-year-old woman, 
who has worked for a defense contractor for the past year. She and her husband were 
unable to pay their two mortgages after Applicant’s business closed in September 2007 
and she became unemployed for six months. The current economic downturn and her 
husband’s injury further exacerbated the problem. She attempted to renegotiate the 
loans, but was unable to do so without the assistance of a lawyer. Those loans were 
consolidated in August 2009 and a lower monthly payment established. Based on 
Applicant’s awareness of the effect that future financial problems could have on her 
employment, along with her budget that is sufficient to pay her expenses, debts, and 
reduced mortgage payments, it is unlikely that similar financial problems will recur. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without concerns as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
 
7 
 
 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                              
   
 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
