 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )
SSN: ---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10124
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
On May 16, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance for his employment
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On July 27, 2009, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline M (misuse of2
The Government submitted seven items to support its case.3
2
information technology), Guideline E (personal conduct), and Guideline D (sexual
behavior).
.
Applicant timely responded to the SOR, and admitted allegations in ¶ 1.b and ¶
2.b of the SOR. He denied the other allegations in the SOR because he claimed there
was no “nudity” in the photo. He elected to have his case decided on the record in lieu
of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on October
8, 2009.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December3
1, 2009, and was provided an opportunity to file objections and submit material to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case. Applicant submitted additional
information in a timely manner. The case was assigned to me on January 7, 2010.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline M, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant emailed
a nude photograph of himself to a coworker in about December 2007 from his company
issued laptop computer while employed with a defense contractor. In SOR ¶ 1.b, the
government alleged Applicant downloaded approximately 122 personal pictures, to
include four nude photographs of himself onto his company issued laptop computer, in
about December 2007, in violation of the company Code of Conduct. He submitted a
resignation in lieu of termination. 
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a the same information
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The government also alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. the same information
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
Under Guideline D, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a the same information
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. After a thorough review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 54 years old. Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from 1973 until
1994, and held a security clearance. He graduated from college in 1995 (Item 5). Since
March 2008, he has worked as a senior technical writer for a defense contractor. He
also held a clearance during his civilian employment until his resignation in 2008 (Item
6).
Applicant worked as a civilian employee with various contractors from
approximately 1998 until 2008. In December 2007, while employed with a defense
contractor, Applicant uploaded approximately 122 personal pictures to his work
computer. Four of the pictures were full frontal nude pictures of Applicant. Applicant
edited one of the full frontal nude photos by adding a “long black tie” that covered his
genitals. He then emailed the photo to a coworker. Applicant’s coworker, who was also
a friend, informed the security officer of the company about receipt of the photo. She did
3
not file any complaint against Applicant. However, the security manager filed a
complaint (Item 6).
An investigation conducted by Applicant’s employer revealed that Applicant’s
work laptop computer had personal pictures of Applicant including four nude pictures.
Applicant’s program manager interviewed him as part of the investigation. The manager
discussed a performance plan with Applicant. Applicant was put on a three month
probation period. Applicant decided to resign from his employment in January 2008
(Item 7).
Applicant admitted that he downloaded the pictures, and that he emailed the
photo in question to his coworker. He explained that they were friends. He argued that
he had sent previous jokes to her that included items of a sexual nature. He denied that
the photo was a nude one. Applicant disagrees with the characterization of the photo
that he sent to his coworker. He explained that he superimposed a tie on the photo and
that the tie was “intentionally exaggerated” in length and width to cover a lot more than
just the genitals (Response to FORM). He asked that a review of the photo in question
be made before “killing his 36-year-career.” Applicant also argued that the photo was
not intended as one of a sexual nature. He claimed it was meant as a cartoon-type
lampoon on “casual Friday.” He also elaborated that he knew he violated company
policy by storing personal photos on the computer and emailing the photo to his
coworker. He believed that the violation was diminimus given the practices of other
employees in the organization (Item 4).
Applicant stated that he put the nude pictures of himself on his work computer
because he wanted to have them before he started a weight loss program. His reason
for putting them on the work computer rather than his home computer was because he
feared his family might find them during the Christmas vacation in December 2007
(Response to Form). He stated this was a temporary measure and he fully intended to
remove them from the work computer. To support this premise, he explained that he did
not store the photos on a CD or zip drive (Response to Form).
Applicant proffers that his employment record is exemplary and he has
maintained strict responsibility and accountability for a great deal of secret information.
He claims he has never had any problems with handling classified information during
almost 36 years of work (Item 4).
Applicant acknowledged that this was not a responsible thing to do and that he
realized that he used poor judgment. He realized that his actions violated the Guidelines
and the company code, but he argued that the company code of conduct is stretched
and broken daily. He admitted that he learned a lesson from the incident and that he is
sure it will not happen again (Item 4).
Applicant completed his recent SF 86 and listed the reason that he left his
previous position. He explained that he left by mutual agreement after allegations of
misconduct. He specifically stated that he used his work computer for personal use and
he elaborated that he had stored personal pictures, including four of himself, that were
nude (Item 5).
 Directive. 6.3.4
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are: (1) the nature, extent, and5
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors4
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or5
mitigating conditions is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines must be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of a clearance. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline M (misuse of information technology systems), at AG ¶ 39, Guideline E
(personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15, and Guideline D (sexual behavior) at AG ¶ 12.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary7
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The government,
therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite
judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8
5
Analysis
Misuse of Information Technology Systems.
Under Guideline M, “[n]oncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines, or
regulations pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. Information
Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software, firmware, and
data used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or
protection of information.” (AG ¶ 39). The government presented sufficient information
to support the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant admitted using his computer
at work to send the photo to a coworker. He admitted that he downloaded approximately
122 photos of himself, which included four frontal nude shots. Despite the fact that
Applicant put a long tie on his photo, the photo emailed to the female coworker was of a
sexual nature. He further admitted that his actions violated company policy. The
information requires consideration of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 40(e)
(unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system) and ¶ 40(f)
(introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or
from any information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules,
procedures, guidelines, or regulations).
The record does not support consideration of Guideline M mitigating conditions
listed in AG ¶ 41. This conduct occurred in December 2007. Applicant minimized his
actions, although he acknowledged that it was against company policy. He believes his
long career should overcome any security concerns. Applicant has not demonstrated
how his actions do not reflect adversely on his current “reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.” (AG ¶ 41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened,
or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not
apply. The other mitigating conditions are not applicable.
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in the
AG ¶ 15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” 
As to SOR ¶ 2.b, available information requires consideration of the disqualifying
conditions listed in AG ¶ 16(d)(3) (a pattern of rule violations), 16(d)(4) (evidence of
significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or resources) and AG ¶
16(e) (1) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about ones’ conduct, that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community
standing). Certainly, Applicant’s violation of company policy by sending the photo of
himself partially covered to his female coworker on his company issued computer is
6
conduct a person might wish to conceal, as it adversely affects a person’s professional
and community standing.
The mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17(d) (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur) and AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability, to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) do not apply. Applicant cooperated
with the investigation after the complaint was made. He did not alert his employer that
he had downloaded approximately 122 personal pictures of himself, including four
frontal nude ones. It was the female coworker who alerted a security manager.
Applicant has minimized his actions and believes that although his actions were
improper, they are on the end of the continuum where more consideration could be
given, especially in light of his long career.
Sexual Behavior.
The security concerns about Applicant’s sexual behavior, as expressed in the AG
¶ 12, is that “sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicated a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. No
adverse inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on
the sexual orientation of the individual.”
AG ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress) is an applicable disqualifying condition. Applicant had
full frontal nude photos of himself on work computer. 
AG ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of
discretion or judgment) is an applicable disqualifying condition. Applicant’s decision to
send the photo of himself to his female coworker, whether nude or partially nude,
reflects lack of judgment and discretion. The coworker alerted the security manager
about the photo. Thus, it can be inferred that it was of an unwelcome nature.
An applicant might be able to mitigate Guideline D security concerns. One such
mitigating condition (the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation,
or duress), AG ¶ 14(c) may apply. Applicant disclosed the fact that he had left his
position by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct. He elaborated on his
SF 86 that he had personal pictures on his work computer, including four of himself that
were nude. The government, security officials, and previous employer are well aware of
the incident. I do not believe Applicant would compromise national security to avoid
public disclosure of the incident. Any sexual behavior security concerns pertaining to the
incident are dealt with more thoroughly under Guideline M and Guideline E in this
decision. Sexual behavior security concerns are mitigated. 
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 
7
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines M, E, and D. I have also
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is a mature adult who served in the military. He held a security9
clearance for many years. However, when working for a defense contractor in 2007, he
downloaded approximately 122 photos of himself, including four frontal nude ones, to
his work issued computer. He knew this violated company policy. His reasoning for
doing so is suspect. Applicant then sent one of the photos to a female coworker.
Despite the fact that Applicant believed the “long tie” did not make the nude frontal
photo of himself offensive, the coworker took the photo to the security manager.
Applicant’s inappropriate use of his government computer, his poor judgment, and his
minimalization of his behavior when responding to the SOR, leaves me with doubts as
to his judgment. His rationale that the company rules are often stretched and that this
incident should be overlooked in light of his long career, causes me to question his
reliability. He acknowledges his mistake and is sorry for the incident. The positive
information about Applicant is insufficient to overcome the adverse information about his
conduct at his previous job under Guideline M and Guideline E. This raises serious
doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant’s recent conduct does not
mitigate the security concerns under these guidelines. He has mitigated the security
concerns under the sexual behavior guideline, but because protection of the national
interest is paramount in these determinations, my doubts must be resolved in favor of
the national interest.  10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline D: FOR Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant access to classified information. Clearance is denied
                             
                                                    
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
