                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-10545 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant frequently used marijuana from approximately 1995 until June 2007. 
On November 2, 2007, he completed a security clearance application and falsely denied 
that he used marijuana in the last seven years. An Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant on June 9, 2008, and Applicant falsely denied 
using marijuana after June 2001. On June 16, 2008, he admitted his extensive 
marijuana use to the OPM investigator. He mitigated security concerns arising from 
drug involvement because his drug abuse was not recent. However, personal conduct 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF-86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On June 30, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
The June 30, 2009, SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol 
consumption) and E (personal conduct) (HE 2). On July 30, 2009, Applicant responded 
to the June 30, 2009, SOR and requested a hearing (HE 3). With the consent of the 
Applicant, the government withdrew the June 30, 2009, SOR and issued an amended 
SOR on August 13, 2009 (Transcript (Tr. 14); HE 4). The amended SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) (HE 
4). The amended SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the amended SOR allegations on August 21, 2009. 
Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on September 15, 2009. On 
October 22, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On November 13, 2009, the hearing 
notice was issued, and his hearing was held on December 16, 2009 (HE 1). Department 
Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1-4) (Transcript (Tr.) 15-16), and Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits (Tr. 11). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4 (Tr. 16). 
Additionally, I attached the Hearing Notice, SOR, response to the SOR, amended SOR, 
and response to the amended SOR to the record (HE 1-5). I received the transcript on 
December 28, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the amended SOR allegations in his response to the 
amended SOR, except for SOR ¶ 2.a (HE 5). His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has worked for a government contractor as a 
researcher for about 26 months (Tr. 7, 18; GE 1). He is a high school graduate and 
completed about two years of college (Tr. 7). He majored in chemical engineering (Tr. 
8). He has never served in the U.S. military (GE 1). He does not hold a security 
clearance (Tr. 7). He has never been married, and does not have any children (GE 1). 
 
Marijuana use 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant said he frequently used 
marijuana sometimes more than once per day; on other times, he used marijuana a few 
times per week from 1995 to June 2007 (Tr. 19; GE 2 at 2). In June 2007, he left the 
state where he used marijuana and moved in with his parents (Tr. 19; GE 2 at 2). He 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
also ended his marijuana use (Tr. 19; GE 2 at 2). Applicant’s most extensive and recent 
marijuana use was associated with his playing in a band. He stopped using marijuana 
because he left the band, and he recognized that marijuana use was limiting him from 
accomplishing his professional goals (Tr. 20). In the past, he has purchased marijuana 
or received it from friends (Tr. 21). Applicant has never been convicted of any drug 
offenses.   
 
 Applicant still associates with some marijuana users, who are his friends (Tr. 20, 
27-28). He also associates with his brother who uses marijuana (Tr. 20, 27). However, 
after June 2007, they have not used marijuana in his presence (Tr. 28).  
 
Oxycontin abuse 
 
 In March 2001, Applicant injured his knee (Tr. 21). He received a prescription for 
one or two 20 milligram Oxycontin pills per day to address pain from knee surgery (Tr. 
21; GE 2 at 2). He used three or four Oxycontin pills every day until July 2001, 
exceeding his prescription’s limitations (Tr. 21; GE 2 at 2). He said he abused Oxycontin 
because he was depressed about his injury, the loss of a relationship with his girlfriend, 
and “being stupid” (Tr. 22). 
 
Therapy 
 
 From 2002 to 2003, Applicant received education and therapy in connection with 
his alcohol consumption and marijuana use (GE 2 at 7). His education and therapy 
program ended with a successful prognosis on October 14, 2003 (GE 2 at 7). His 
employer does not conduct urinalysis-drug testing for employees (Tr. 33).   
  
False statements 
 
In 1997, Applicant was arrested for marijuana possession (Tr. 22). He was 
charged with and convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) in March 
1999 and December 2000 (Tr. 23-24; GE 2 at 5).  
 
On November 2, 2007, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application 
(SF-86).2 In response to questions concerning prior alcohol-related charges and 
convictions, Applicant said in December 2000, he was charged with DUI. He pleaded 
guilty and received probation. In April 2001, he was charged with driving with a 
suspended license. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to thirty days in jail. He did 
not disclose his 1997 arrest for marijuana possession or his 1998 DUI conviction 
because he misread the question (Tr. 23-24). He thought it asked for alcohol or drug 
related charges or convictions in the last seven years (Tr. 23-24).  
 
In response to questions concerning alcohol-related treatment, he disclosed that 
he attended court-ordered alcohol education from about April 2001 to September 2001 
 
2Applicant’s November 2, 2007, SF-86 is the source for all of the facts in this paragraph and the 
next paragraph, unless another citation is provided. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(Tr. 24). He disclosed his marijuana use during this therapy program (Tr. 25). In 
response to questions about illegal drug use in the last seven years, Applicant 
responded, “No” and did not list any marijuana use. He conceded his answer to the 
question about previous drug use was deliberately false (Tr. 25).  
 
An OPM investigator interviewed Applicant on June 9, 2008.3 The OPM 
investigator asked Applicant about the medical records generated during his alcohol 
treatment sessions (GE 2 at 6). Applicant repeatedly told the OPM investigator that he 
did not use marijuana after June 2001, and the medical records would not show any 
current marijuana use. Applicant stated: 
 
[I]n June 2001 [] he had a revelation that alcohol use and drug use were 
hurting him more than helping him. He did not have a supply of marijuana 
available anymore, and it was while he was on the phone to a nurse trying 
to get a refill on Oxycontin that he realized he needed to stop all drug 
[abuse] and stop all drinking if he was going to live. He terminated the call 
to the nurse and has not used marijuana since June 2001 .  .  .  . When he 
was at his parent’s home in June 2001, he realized that things needed to 
change if he was going to survive and if he was going to accomplish 
anything in his life.  .  .  .  He could not support himself holding menial 
jobs. He decided at that moment to stop smoking marijuana and stop 
drinking. He only recently began consuming a few beers on rare social 
occasions; he never resumed smoking marijuana.  
 
Id. at 1-2. He explained that his medical records from the alcohol-therapy sessions 
should reflect that he was not currently using marijuana because “he had discontinued 
marijuana use in June 2001 and never resumed it.” Id. at 2.     
 
The OPM investigator asked Applicant about the medical evidence concerning 
his more recent marijuana use and he still denied it (Tr. 34; GE 2 at 6). According to the 
OPM Report of Investigation (ROI), Applicant called the OPM investigator on June 10, 
2008, and left the OPM investigator a message, offering to “come clean” about his 
marijuana use (Tr. 30; GE 2 at 7). He realized that the OPM investigator had his 
admissions in therapy about drug use that Applicant had written down (Tr. 31). He knew 
it was hopeless to continue to deny his more recent marijuana use (Tr. 31-32, 34). He 
wanted his security clearance decision to be made based on the true facts of his drug 
use (Tr. 32). He felt guilty about lying and did not want the government to waste time 
and money investigating his drug use (Tr. 31-32, 34).  
 
On June 16, 2008, Applicant admitted his extensive marijuana use to the OPM 
investigator. He made consistent statements about his marijuana use continuing until 
June 2007 in response to DOHA interrogatories on February 20, 2009, and April 3, 
2009, and at his hearing (Tr. 22-27).  
 
 
3Applicant’s June 9, 2008, and June 16, 2008, OPM interviews are the source for all the facts in 
this paragraph and the next two paragraphs, unless another citation is provided (GE 3 at 5-10).  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
In sum, Applicant admitted that he failed to disclose his 1999 arrest for DUI (Tr. 
23; SOR ¶ 2.a) and his extensive marijuana use from 2002 until June 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
He also admitted that he provided false information in his OPM interview on June 9, 
2008, about his marijuana use from 2002 to June 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.c). At his hearing, he 
admitted that his statements to the OPM investigator about ending his marijuana use in 
June 2001 were intentionally false, and noted he used marijuana on numerous 
occasions after June 2001 (Tr. 26, 29). He expressed his remorse about making false 
statements to the government (Tr. 35) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the amended SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug4 involvement-related conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. See Sch. I(c)(9). See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular 
case: AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”5 and AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession.”   
 
Applicant admitted frequent marijuana use, essentially on a daily basis, from 
approximately 1995 until June 2007. He possessed marijuana before he used it. He 
also admitted using a larger quantity of Oxycontin, a prescription drug, than authorized 
by his prescription. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. The other disqualifying conditions 
listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable.   
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that the drug offenses are unlikely to recur or do not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright 
line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based 
“on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the 
directive.”  ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the 
Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an 
 
5AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing 
was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”6 
 
Applicant’s most recent drug use was in June 2007, about 30 months ago. AG ¶ 
26(a) fully applies. His overall illegal drug use lasted approximately 12 years (1995 to 
2007), and involved numerous uses of marijuana. AG ¶ 26(a) applies because his past 
drug use does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.7 Because of his abstention from drug use for about 30 months, and his 
recognition of the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse, there is reasonable certitude 
that he will continue to abstain from drug use. I am reasonably confident his illegal drug 
possession and use will not recur. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the future, 
confidence in his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment with respect to 
drug use is restored.   
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has disassociated himself from most of his drug-using 
associates and contacts. After breaking his patterns of drug abuse, he has changed his 
life with respect to drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse for about 30 months. 
However, he continues to associate with his brother and possibly some other marijuana 
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
7In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
users. He did not provide “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(c) apply to his abuse of Oxycontin. He received Oxycontin to 
treat his knee injury, and consumed more Oxycontin than he was supposed to from 
about March 2001 to July 2001. He has not used Oxycontin since July 2001.  
 
AG ¶ 26(d) is not applicable because Applicant did not provide evidence of 
attendance at any drug treatment program. He has not provided any prognosis focusing 
on his drug abuse by a duly qualified medical professional.   
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in June 2007, about 30 months 
ago. The motivations to stop using drugs are evident.8 He understands the adverse 
results from drug abuse. He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no 
drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified 
information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that on November 12, 2007, Applicant falsely denied that he 
had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs. 
Applicant disclosed his December 2000 driving under influence of alcohol (DUI) arrest 
and his April 2001 arrest for driving with a suspended license. He explained that he did 
 
8Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
not disclose his March 1999 DUI arrest because he thought he only had to disclose 
information about criminal offenses occurring in the last seven years. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that on November 12, 2007, Applicant falsely denied that he 
used illegal drugs in the last seven years. SOR ¶ 2.c alleges that on June 9, 2008, 
Applicant falsely denied to an OPM investigator that he used marijuana in the last seven 
years. On June 16, 2008, he admitted to an OPM investigator that he knowingly and 
intentionally provided false information on June 9, 2008, in his previous OPM interview 
about his marijuana abuse. In his amended SOR response and at his hearing he 
admitted he intentionally falsified his November 12, 2007, security clearance application 
with respect to the recency of his marijuana use. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
AG ¶ 17(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.c, Applicant’s false statement to the OPM 
investigator on June 8, 2009, because he made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
falsification before being confronted with the facts. On June 8, 2008, Applicant falsely 
denied to an OPM investigator that he had used marijuana in the last seven years. He 
provided a fairly elaborate description to the OPM investigator about why he ended his 
marijuana use in 2001. After the interview, Applicant realized his lie about the recency 
of his marijuana use was not credible because medical records that the OPM 
investigator would review included information about his extensive, more recent 
marijuana use. According to the OPM ROI, Applicant called the OPM investigator on 
June 10, 2008, and left the OPM investigator a message, offering to “come clean” about 
his marijuana use. On June 16, 2008, he admitted to the OPM investigator that 
extensively used marijuana until June 2007, and that he falsified his June 9, 2008, OPM 
interview about his marijuana abuse. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) mitigates the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Although Applicant admitted 
that on November 12, 2007, he failed to disclose his March 1999 DUI arrest, he 
explained that he mistakenly thought he only had to disclose information about criminal 
offenses occurring in the last seven years. This failure to disclose his March 1999 DUI 
was not deliberate, and this allegation of falsification is unsubstantiated.9   
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e) and 17(g) all apply in part to SOR ¶ 2.b. His false 
statement in connection with his 2007 security clearance application cannot be fully 
mitigated because it is too recent and serious. However, there are some positive signs 
of rehabilitation. He admitted his misconduct. No allegations of problems at his 
employment have surfaced. He has changed the environment where most of his 
marijuana use occurred. See AG ¶ 17(g). He paid his fines and court costs in resulting 
from his DUI conviction. He has demonstrated remorse, an important step toward his 
rehabilitation. He received job training and has a good employment record. His security 
manager is well aware of his alcohol-related and drug-abuse problems. Disclosure has 
eliminated his “vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
 
In sum, Applicant intentionally lied on his 2007 security clearance application, 
and on June 9, 2008, to an OPM investigator. His false statement to the OPM 
investigator was elaborate and detailed, as he described changes in his life in 2001 that 
caused him to end his marijuana use in June 2001. However, he corrected the 
information to the OPM investigator two days later before being confronted with the 
 
9The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
medical records showing his extensive marijuana use. However, his deliberately false 
official statement in 2007 is too recent and serious to be mitigated.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
    
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. He has not committed any offenses since he provided false information to 
an OPM investigator on June 8, 2008. He took full responsibility for his marijuana use 
on June 16, 2008, and at his hearing, for lying, and for his more recent and extensive 
marijuana use. Applicant contributed to the national defense through his work for a 
government contractor. There is no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. 
There is no evidence of drug abuse after June 2007. There is no evidence that he has 
failed to safeguard sensitive or classified information. His character and good work 
performance show substantial responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Because of his age and maturity, Applicant was well aware of the importance of 
providing accurate information in the context of evaluating and retaining a security 
clearance. In November 2007, and on June 8, 2008, he intentionally provided false 
information about his marijuana use on his security clearance application and to an 
OPM investigator.10 His two false statements were knowledgeable, voluntary, and 
 
10Although Appellant was not charged with any offense because of his incorrect statements about 
his marijuana use, Congress has manifested the importance of providing accurate information in matters 
such as security clearance applications by enacting a statute punishing materially false statements as 
felony under Title 18 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1001. 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
intentional.11 His providing of false information about his drug use on his 2007 security 
clearance application cannot be mitigated at this time. This misconduct shows lack of 
judgment and a lack of trustworthiness. Such conduct establishes a serious security 
concern, and access to classified information is not warranted at this time.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not fully 
mitigated all security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors,”12 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. I conclude he has shown sufficient responsibility and rehabilitation 
to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. However, personal conduct security 
concerns cannot be mitigated at this time. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not 
eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
PARAGRAPH 1, GUIDELINE H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
PARAGRAPH 2, GUIDELINE E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
11 A prompt correction of the falsification is not a legal defense to a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001; 
however, it is sufficient to mitigate security concerns about this false statement under AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
12See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
