                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 09-00973 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) as part 
of her employment with a defense contractor on November 6, 2007 (Item 5). On May 5, 
2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns for financial 
considerations (Item 1). The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 30, 2009 (Item 3).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 2, 2009. She admitted 17 and 
denied five of the 22 allegations under Guideline F. She also denied the public trust 
concern raised by her financial issues. She elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). Department counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on October 5, 2009. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on November 19, 2009, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
1 
 
2 
 
conditions. Applicant timely provided additional information in response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on January 11, 2010. Based on a review of the case file 
and pleadings, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 
1.e to 1.l, 1.n to 1.r, and 1.t to 1.v. She denied the debts at SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.m, 
and 1.s. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and has been a claims analyst for a defense contractor 
for over eight years. She is married with no children (Item 5). There is no information in 
the case file indicting her monthly income and expenses. 
 
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR (Item 4), her answers to interrogatories (Items 7 
and 8), and credit reports (Items 9 and 10) establish that Applicant has delinquent 
debts, totaling approximately $66,701. The documents support the debts for: a state tax 
lien of $365 (SOR 1.a); medical debts of $140 (SOR 1.b), $182 (SOR 1.c), $145 (SOR 
1.d), $980 (SOR 1.e), $537 (SOR 1.f), $237 (SOR 1.g), $56 (SOR 1.h), $175 (SOR 1.i), 
$55 (SOR 1.j), $1,198 (SOR 1.k), $608 (SOR 1.l), and $88 (SOR 1.m); a credit card in 
collection for $8,858 (SOR 1.n): a charged off debt for $1,211 (SOR 1.o); a debt of 
$8,782 for a repossessed vehicle (SOR 1.p); a cell phone account in collection for $211 
(SOR 1.q); a debt of $41,237 for a repossessed mobile home (SOR 1.r); a debt in 
collection for telephone service for $61 (SOR 1.s); a charged-off debt to a department 
store for $1,513 (SOR 1.t); and two debts in collection to the same collection agency for 
the same utility for $504 (SOR 1.u), and $321 (SOR 1.v). 
 
 Applicant provided documentation that the debt at SOR 1.s was paid in full (item 
4 at 7). She provided documentation of payment of $168.60 to a creditor for a debt 
owed to a hospital. It appears this is the debt listed at SOR 1.d and the debt would be 
paid in full (Item 4 at 8). She provided documentation of payment of $100 on a medical 
debt (Item 4 at 6). The original debt on the receipt is for $1,197, so the payment pertains 
to a payment on the debt at SOR 1.k. Applicant provided documentation that the debt at 
SOR 1.a was satisfied by use of her state tax refund (Item 4 at 9, Item 6). 
 
 In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated that some of her debts were 
disputed, but provided no documentation concerning the dispute or any resolution of the 
disputes. For some debts, she indicated she would make payment arrangements. She 
presented no documentation concerning any payment arrangements.  
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator, she stated she co-
signed the loans for the repossessed mobile home listed at SOR 1.r and the 
repossessed car listed at SOR 1.p for the same person. That person was current on the 
loan payments until she lost her job. Since Applicant had her own mortgage and car 
payments, she could not afford to pay the two repossession debts. In response to the 
FORM, Applicant provided a letter from the person for whom she co-signed the loan, 
verifying that Applicant co-signed the loans and that the loans were current until she lost 
3 
 
her job (Response to FORM, Letter, dated November 19, 2009). Applicant believes one 
of the delinquent debts may be for a computer she co-signed for. The person she co-
signed for indicated in the Response to the FORM that she was current on the debt until 
"things got hard with money." Later she tried to make payments but the loan had gone 
to collections and she did not know the new creditor. When she learns the address of 
the new creditor, she will again make payments (Response to FORM, Letter dated 
November 19, 2009).  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect sensitive information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds 
(AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligation to protect sensitive 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of access to sensitive information. An applicant is not 
required to be debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to 
meet her financial obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts from credit cards and 
medical debts, repossessions, and department stores as established by credit reports 
and Applicant’s admissions, are a public trust concern raising Financial Consideration 
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and 
FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant has significant 
delinquent debts that she has not resolved.   
 
 I have considered a number of Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions 
(FC MC). FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
While the debts may have been incurred in the past, some are still unpaid and thus 
current. There are a number of different accounts and debts, so the debts were not 
incurred infrequently. Applicant has not presented any information to establish that the 
delinquent debts will not recur. Her continued debts and financial situation cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
5 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separations) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). Applicant has not presented any 
information to establish circumstances beyond her control that caused her delinquent 
debts. She stated that at least three of the largest debts were caused when she co-
signed loans for a mobile home, a car, and a computer and the borrower defaulted. 
Applicant willingly co-signed the loans so her actions were not beyond her control. 
When a person co-signs a loan, there is a risk the borrower will default. Applicant 
should have realized she was putting her finances at risk and ensured she could 
manage the debt if there was a default. She could not handle the debt, so she did not 
act reasonably and responsibly.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate she received financial 
counseling. Even if she had received counseling, there is no indication her financial 
problems are being resolved or under control. She is not making payments on her 
delinquent debts, and does not have a plan to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). Applicant presented 
documentation that three of her delinquent debts have been settled and paid. However, 
one debt was resolved by the state using a tax refund to pay the debt. This is not a 
good-faith effort to resolve the debt, but the result of a forced action by the state. 
However, the debt has been paid. For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must be an “ability” 
to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith effort to repay. 
A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. Good-faith means acting in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation. Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debt only 
under pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant presented information to 
show she paid three of the 22 delinquent debts. Applicant did not present a concrete 
plan to show how she would pay her remaining delinquent debts. Her only statement 
was that she was currently working to obtain money to settle the remaining debts. She 
did not provide information about how she was trying to raise funds to pay the debts. A 
promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a good-faith intention to resolve 
debts. Applicant did not present sufficient information to establish a good-faith effort to 
pay creditors or resolve debts. Her finances are not under control and she has not acted 
responsibly towards her finances. She has not mitigated security concerns for financial 
considerations. 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
6 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not presented 
information to show she has taken sufficient action to resolve her financial issues. 
Applicant must establish that she has a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, 
including evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. She is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that she paid off each and every debt listed in 
the SOR. All that is required is that she has a plan to resolve her financial problems and 
takes significant action to implement that plan. The entirety of her financial situation and 
her actions can reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which his plan to 
reduce his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. Available, reliable 
information about the person's behavior, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.  
 
Applicant has not established a "meaningful track record" of debt payment by 
presenting information to show she is taking sufficient, consistent, reasonable, and 
responsible action to resolve her financial issues. She did resolve three small delinquent 
debts. But this is only a small part of her delinquent debts. She did not present a plan to 
show she intends to resolve and pay her remaining delinquent debts. Applicant has not 
demonstrated she is responsibly managing her finances under the circumstances. She 
does not have a consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. She has not 
established that she has or will take reasonable steps to address her remaining 
delinquent debts and resolve her financial problems. The record does show she has 
been irresponsible towards her financial obligations. The lack of responsible 
management of finances obligations indicates she will not be concerned or responsible, 
but will be careless, in regard to sensitive information. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She has not established her suitability for access to sensitive 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the public 
trust concerns arising from her financial situation. Access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
