                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03410 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On July 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 16, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 16, 
2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on the same day. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 3, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and 
she offered Exhibits (AE) A through E. They were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 10, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She is a systems engineer for a federal contractor. She 
married in 1991 and was separated from her husband for about 9 to 12 months in 1995, 
before they reconciled. They have three children, ages 17, 12, and 7. Applicant has a 
bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees.1 
 
 In May 1998, Applicant had approximately $42,000 in delinquent consumer debt 
discharged in bankruptcy under Chapter 7. She was earning approximately $47,000 
annually at the time. She attributed her financial problems to her separation from her 
husband that occurred in 1995, and her being responsible for paying the marital debts. 
She had two small children to care for at the time and had child care expenses. Her 
husband did not pay child support when he was not living with them. When he returned 
he was only working part-time.2  
 
 There are 26 debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant does not dispute the debts and 
has provided proof that she settled and paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($462) and 1.w 
($118). Both were settled for less than the balance owed.3 
 
 Applicant and her husband bought a house in 2000. They moved to another state 
in 2001, and decided to retain the house and rent it. In 2003, they entered into a rent-to-
own contract with the lessee. He was to pay a $5,000 down payment, pay the monthly 
rent, and pay an extra $100 a month toward the purchase of the property. After five 
years he would purchase the property. Applicant stated she received the payments for 
five years and the extra monthly payments and down payment, but decided she did not 
want to sell the property because the property had appreciated, and she wanted to 
cancel the contract. She offered to return the down payment and the other payments 
that were held in escrow. The lessee sued for fulfillment of the contact. Applicant 
decided to save money by not hiring an attorney and represented herself. She lost the 
lawsuit and a judgment for approximately $120,000 was entered in September 2008. 
She has not paid that judgment and the lessee has placed liens on her current 
1 Tr. 107-108. 
 
2 Tr. 22-23, 98-102. 
 
3 Tr. 25; Answer to SOR; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
residence.4 He also has a lien against a line of credit account Applicant has with a credit 
card company. Applicant had difficulties making the mortgage payments on the rental 
property. It was foreclosed in June 2009, and it has not been sold to date. The debt 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.v is the amount that was past due on the mortgage when it was 
foreclosed. Applicant has not received a deficiency notice, but she intends to include 
any amount owed in her bankruptcy. Applicant also testified that they were always 
losing money on the rental property because they would not receive enough rent to 
cover the mortgage and expenses. This continued to place a significant financial burden 
on her as did the lawsuit.5  
 
 Applicant admitted that she had approximately 20 credit cards at one time. She 
no longer has any open credit cards. She consulted with a credit consolidation company 
in November 2008, but because she had a large judgment against her they advised her 
to seek legal advice. She stated she contracted with a law firm to file bankruptcy. She 
stated that upon the advice of her attorney she and her husband stopped paying all of 
their debts around November 2008. She admitted that all of the debts listed in the SOR 
belong to her and she owes them, except for the two she settled. Some of her debts 
were not delinquent when she ceased paying them. She defaulted on several debts 
prior to her receiving advice from her attorney. She stated she did not pay those debts 
because she could not afford to do so. The debts are for credit cards, consumer 
purchases, gas, medical expenses, the purchase of a computer, and a line of credit. 
She used the credit cards to supplement her income. On a couple of occasions, 
Applicant made a small payment towards one or two of her debts, even after she was 
advised by her attorney. Applicant has not paid the balances owed on her debts and 
does not intend to pay any of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR, but will include 
them all in her bankruptcy petition.6  
 
Applicant attributes her financial problems to poor legal advice she received from 
her attorney. She stated she received conflicting advice from the attorney about whether 
she would qualify for a Chapter 7, 11, or 13 bankruptcy. She paid a retainer fee to the 
attorney in November 2008. She claimed he procrastinated and did not initiate the 
bankruptcy. She continued to consult with the attorney until October 2009. Applicant 
hired a different attorney to file bankruptcy. She completed the required counseling for 
bankruptcy on November 12, 2009, and the case was filed under Chapter 13 
bankruptcy on November 25, 2009. At this point, no plan has been proposed or 
approved.7  
 
4 Applicant also noted that there is another lien from a credit card company based on an account held by 
her husband. I have not considered this for disqualifying purposes, but will consider it when analyzing 
Appellant’s financial history and ability to pay her debts. 
 
5 Tr. 23, 54-58, 61-74. 
 
6 Tr. 27-54, 58-61, 73; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 81-84, 103-106; AE D and E. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant earns approximately $150,000 in annual salary. She has earned this 
amount for approximately two years. Her husband earns between approximately 
$30,000 and $40,000. In 2005, they purchased the house where they live now for 
approximately $610,000. They owe more on the house than its assessed value. They 
own two cars, one purchased new in 2007, with a monthly payment of $809, and the 
other a 2002 model with a monthly payment of $643. They own a time share on which 
pay $218 a month. Applicant owes more than $100,000 in student loans that were 
deferred and became due in December 2009. The monthly payment is $579. Applicant 
withdrew $8,000 from her 401k retirement account and paid the tax penalty. She does 
not have any money in savings. Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement from June 
2009, shows a negative monthly remainder.8 She does not have a written budget.9  
 
Applicant’s husband testified on her behalf and corroborated they received poor 
legal advice from their attorney. He attributes all of their financial problems to the 
judgment against them for breach of contract.10  
 
Applicant’s coworker and now manager testified and described her as a 
trustworthy person who has never had a security issue. She is considered very cautious 
and conscientious when handling sensitive material. She believes Appellant has a high 
level of integrity.11  
 
Applicant provided a character letter from her supervisor who describes her as a 
trustworthy team member. Applicant’s manager also provided a character letter for her 
and describes her as a person with a superior work ethic, high integrity, and solid 
character. She takes pride in ensuring her work assignments are accomplished to the 
best of her abilities. She volunteers for additional assignment, increased responsibility 
and any opportunity to improve her skills. She has had no security incidents and is a 
person of solid character.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 58, 74-81, 85-98, 106. 
 
10 Tr. 112-117. 
 
11 Tr. 119-125. 
 
12 AE B. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Appellant has a history of not meeting her financial obligations. In 1998 she had 
$42,000 in consumer debt discharged in bankruptcy. She recently filed again for 
bankruptcy. She has many consumer debts. She admitted that at one time she had 20 
credit cards and used some of them to supplement her income. She owes a large 
judgment that has not been resolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because her delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
She filed her second bankruptcy in November 2009, but the terms of it have not yet 
been completed. She has a considerable amount of consumer debt. I find the 
delinquent debts remain unresolved and, based on her financial history, I cannot find 
they are unlikely to recur. Applicant attributes her financial problems to her rental 
property that was a financial drain and the eventual lawsuit involving it. A judgment and 
lien were entered against her for breach of contract. This created more of a financial 
hardship. Applicant’s husband was unemployed for a period of time. Together they now 
earn a substantial income. She has many other expenses and debts. It appears she has 
not made an attempt to satisfy the judgment because she does not have the money. 
She has a minimal amount of savings and no equity in her present home. Although 
these are all unfortunate circumstances, Applicant had control over how she proceeded 
with the sale of her property, and her change of heart in selling it caused the financial 
crisis. The conditions that resulted in Applicant’s contractual dispute were within her 
control. Applicant’s husband’s unemployment was beyond her control. Applicant hired 
an attorney to file for bankruptcy, but had difficulties with him. She has not provided 
sufficient evidence to conclude she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Other 
than filing for bankruptcy she had no other plan for paying the judgment and delinquent 
debts. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant decided to file for her second bankruptcy and she sought legal advice, 
but believes she was provided poor advice. Applicant’s household income is significant 
and she should have been in a position to pay her creditors. She stated she followed 
her attorney’s advice and instead she chose to default on her debts and attempt to have 
everything included in her pending bankruptcy. She has received the mandatory 
financial counseling required of those filing bankruptcy. She does not have a budget. 
She has not made a good-faith effort to repay her creditors or resolve her debts. 13 
Although bankruptcy is a legal mechanism to discharge debts, at this juncture it is too 
early to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to recur. I find 
mitigating conditions (c) and (d) do not apply. I find the facts do not merit application of 
mitigating condition (e) because Applicant does not dispute the debts.  
 
 
13 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition [AG ¶ 
20 (d)], an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s 
debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has 
indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way 
that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a 
legally available options (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial 
Considerations Mitigating Condition [AG ¶ 20 (d)]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had $42,000 discharged in 
bankruptcy in 1998. She has filed bankruptcy again. She lost a lawsuit and a judgment 
was entered against her. Her household income is significant, but with their expenses 
and other debts, it is unclear if they cannot or will not pay the judgment. She testified 
that based on their lawyer’s advice they stopped paying their debts and are including 
them in their bankruptcy, even though she claimed many were not delinquent at the 
time she stopped paying. Although bankruptcy is a legal means to resolve debts, it is 
not considered a good-faith effort to pay creditors. Applicant has failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude she has a budget or a financial plan that she will comply 
with and that she can live within her financial means. At this juncture, it is too early to 
make that conclusion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.v:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph   1.w:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.x-1.bb:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
