 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-01750    
    ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the 
guideline for financial considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 28, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for 
Sensitive Positions (Standard Form 86) to request a security clearance required 
as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results 
of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative 
 
 
1  
 
 
2  
ovember 12, 2009. 
                                                     
finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
request.  
 
 On July 14, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In her Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized 
on August 10, 2009, Applicant denied all the allegations under Guideline F 
except subparagraphs 1.a., 1.f., and 1.k. She also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 21, 2009 and 
the case was assigned to me on August 29, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on October 7, 2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 4, 2009. During the hearing, the government offered ten exhibits, 
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10,3 which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified, and offered two exhibits, admitted without 
objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. I held the record open for 
Applicant to submit additional documentation. She timely submitted four 
documents, admitted without objection as Applicant's Exhibit (AE) C through F. 
DOHA received the transcript on N
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After 
a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), approved by 
the President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and 
they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on 
or after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 Applicant attached 128 pages to GE 4, her Interrogatory response. They were not assembled or 
marked in relation to the SOR allegations. I have sorted the pages that appear to relate to a 
particular allegation as follows: GE 4-1 (allegation 1.d.); GE 4-2 (allegations 1.f. and 1.k.); GE 4-3 
(allegation 1.h.); GE 4-4 (allegation 1.i.); GE 4-5 (allegation 1.j.); GE 4-6 (allegation 1.l.); GE 4-7 
(allegation 1.n.); GE 4-8 (allegation 1.p.). The response also included GE 4-9 (personal financial 
statement); GE 4-10 (April 2009 credit bureau report); GE 4-11 (June 2005 credit bureau report); 
GE 4-12 (allegation 1.h.); GE 4-13 (2005 creditor letters regarding refunds); GE 4-14 (bank 
statement); GE 4-15 (ex-husband’s credit bureau report ); GE 4-16 (car repair documents); GE 4-
17 (2002 letter from Better Business Bureau); GE 4-18 (blank credit report dispute form); GE 4-19 
(2005 form letters from unknown company); GE 4-20 (DOHA Interrogatory of March 2009). 
 
 
3  
 Applicant, who is 43 years old, completed some college credits but did not 
earn a degree. She is currently separated from her husband. She has a 27-year-
old son, and a 25-year-old daughter who served in the U.S. Army for 
approximately three years. Neither of the children currently lives with Applicant, 
although Applicant has provided them with significant financial support. She has 
worked in the information technology field since the mid-1990s. She has worked 
for a defense contractor since mid-2008, currently holding the position of 
sharepoint design developer. This is her first application for a security clearance 
(GE 1; Tr. 25-27, 63). 
 
 Applicant testified that she has been financially insecure since she was 
16, when her first child was born and her first husband left. She attributes her 
financial problems to the need to support herself and her two children solely on 
her own income. Her children were born during her first marriage, and her 
subsequent husbands would not contribute to the children’s support. Working as 
a contractor, Applicant had periods of unemployment in between contracts, 
including a few months in 2003 and a few months in 2007. Other than those 
periods, Applicant has been employed for the past ten years. However, many of 
her jobs were brief, lasting only a few months. In 2000, she filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy petition, which was discharged the same year. She has not sought 
financial counseling or worked with a debt consolidation service, and she does 
not intend to file for bankruptcy (GE 1, 5, 6, 7, 8; Tr. 28-33, 53-58).  
 
 After taxes and deductions, Applicant earns monthly take-home pay of 
approximately $8,300, for an annual net income of approximately $99,000. 
According to her personal financial statement, Applicant’s $7,256 monthly 
expenses include rent, utilities, food, clothing, medical and household expenses. 
She also listed a car loan of $954, and another unidentified loan of $1,149 per 
month. She spends about $200 per month on pet care and grooming. Applicant 
makes credit card payments of $450 per month, and she testified that her credit 
card payments have been up-to-date for years. Until about September 2009, she 
also helped support her two adult children. In 2008, she provided them with 
$40,000, for an average of approximately $3,300 monthly. Applicant has about 
$200 in a checking account, does not have a savings account, and does not 
contribute to a retirement plan. She reported a monthly net remainder of 
approximately $1,050. She plans to use her monthly remainders to buy a camper 
so that, if she is unemployed in the future, and/or has to move out-of-state for 
employment, she could live in the camper (GE 4-9; Tr. 34-49; 51). 
 
 The 17 debts listed in the SOR accrued between 2003 and 2008, and total 
more than $49,000. Each of the delinquent debts appears in Applicant's credit 
reports of November 2008 and January and June 2009 (GE 5, 6, 7). The status 
of the SOR debts follows. 
 
• Judgment: Allegations 1.b. $4,251 and 1.e. ($1,357). Applicant failed to 
pay interest owed on a furniture purchase in 2007, and the company 
 
 
4  
prevailed in its suit (1.b.). She testified that the debt at allegation 1.e. is 
the same debt ($1,357) before the interest, court costs and other fees 
were added. She also stated that payments of $200 per month were 
garnished from her salary, and the debt is paid. She did not provide 
evidence that it is paid, and the debt appears as delinquent in her 
November 2009 credit bureau report (GE 5, 6, 7; AE E; Tr. 60-62; 70-71).  
 
$   Rent: Allegations 1.c. ($10,570) and 1.l. ($10,570). In about 2005, 
Applicant rented a house for her daughter, who failed to pay the rent. She 
left the house without notifying Applicant, who was unaware of the debt 
until her security interview. A judgment was filed against Applicant for 
unpaid rent. She has not paid the debt, and is uncertain about how she 
will deal with it. She also testified that allegations 1.c. and 1.l., are the 
same debt. Allegation 1.l. appears as delinquent in her November 2009 
credit bureau report (AE E; Tr. 62-66). 
 
• Returned Check: Allegation 1.d. ($70) relates to a fast-food purchase in 
October 2004. Applicant paid with a check that was returned for 
insufficient funds. Although her current credit report shows an outstanding 
debt of $70, she provided a money order receipt showing she paid the 
amount requested by the merchant, $45. The receipt is dated December 
8, 2004 (GE 4-1, 5; Tr. 66-70). 
 
• Credit cards - Allegation 1.f. ($2,032) and 1.k. ($1,109). In 2003, 
Applicant’s credit card was stolen. Applicant learned that the card had 
been used by the thief. She reported the theft to the police, and to the 
credit card company, which closed the account. However, the company 
claims that she then opened a new account. Applicant denies opening it, 
stating that the first name, maiden name, and address on the new 
account are not hers; she never possessed a card for the new account; 
and someone else opened the account and used the card. She disputed 
the new account with the issuing company by telephone, and with the 
three credit reporting agencies. The evidence shows that the account in 
allegation 1.k. became delinquent in 2005, and was sold to a collection 
agency (GE 4-2, 5). In 2007, when the balance was $879, the agency 
offered Applicant a settlement (GE 4-2). She informed the agency that it 
was not her account based on the incorrect name and address. Applicant 
testified that these two allegations refer to the same credit card. However, 
the accounts at allegations 1.f. and 1.k. have different account numbers. 
Applicant offered no documentation to support her dispute (GE 4-2, 5, 6; 
AE A; Tr. 71-78, 97-99). 
 
• Repossession: Allegation 1.g. ($3,086). Applicant was making 
payments on her car loan but, after the company changed ownership 
numerous times, her payments were not credited. She contacted the 
company several times but was not told why her payments were not 
 
 
5  
                                                     
credited. She testified, “We just couldn’t come to terms.” In December 
2008, Applicant requested that the creditor take back her car. She has 
made no payments since that time, and has not been contacted by the 
creditor. Her November 2009 credit bureau report shows the delinquent 
balance to be $10,020 (GE 5, 6, 7; AE E; Tr. 47-48, 78-81). 
 
• Credit card: Allegation 1.h. ($1,932) Applicant testified that this debt 
relates to a bank credit card that was stolen in 2003.4 She reported the 
loss and continued to make payments on the balance in 2004 and 2005. 
However, she testified that the bank returned her checks because the 
account did not exist. As Applicant offered copies only of the front sides of 
the checks, it cannot be determined if the checks were mailed or cashed. 
The debt was sold to a collection agency, which contacted Applicant in 
April 2009 with a settlement offer; however, the debt remains delinquent 
in her November 2009 credit bureau report (GE 4-12; AE A, E; Tr. 81-89). 
 
$   Credit card: Allegation 1.i ($11,000) Applicant disputes this debt, which 
appears on her 2008 and 2009 credit bureau reports. When Applicant 
called the card issuer, she was informed the account was her husband’s. 
The document she provided states that her husband has an account with 
the creditor, and she has no liability for the account. However, the account 
number for her husband’s account (see AE C and GE 4-10) is not the 
same as the account number for the account alleged at ¶ 1.i. in the SOR. 
Her conversations and online disputes are undocumented (GE 5, 6, 7; AE 
B, C, E; Tr. 89-92). 
 
$  Short-term loan: Allegation 1.j. ($575). Applicant procured a loan of 
$500 in 2005. She supplied a document showing a payment of $575 in 
May 2005, although the payee is not legible. However, the debt was sold 
to a collection agency, which contacted her in April 2009 to inform her that 
they held the debt. She contacted the agency to say the debt was paid. 
She provided in her Interrogatory response a copy of a check for $575 
dated May 2005 (GE 4-5; Tr. 92- 95). 
 
$  Collection account: Allegation 1.m ($132). Applicant has no knowledge 
of this debt and has made no payments on it. She does not think she 
investigated or disputed it (GE 6; Tr. 101-103). 
 
$        Medical debt: Allegation 1.n. ($130) Applicant has no knowledge of this 
debt, and has not disputed it with the credit reporting agencies (GE 6; Tr. 
103-105). 
 
4 Applicant did not claim that the debt in allegation 1.h. refers to the same stolen credit card as 
the one discussed at allegations 1.f. and 1.k. The credit card issuer in 1.f. and 1.k. are the same, 
but allegation 1.h. refers to a different creditor.  
 
 
6  
oncept. 
                                                     
$    Credit card: Allegation 1.o. ($2,063). Applicant testified that she did not 
recognize the account and that she called the company, which confirmed 
that she did not have an account. Several days after the hearing, she 
contacted the creditor to obtain information about the account, but she 
provided no further information (GE 4; AE D, E; Tr. 106-108). 
 
$ Veterinarian: Allegation 1.p. ($126). In May 2009, Applicant attempted to 
pay this bill for care of her daughter’s cat. She provided documentation 
showing that her check was returned (GE 6; AE B: Tr. 108-110). 
 
$  Collection account: Allegation 1.q. ($875). Applicant has made no 
payments on this debt, and does not recognize it. She has not contacted 
the creditor or disputed it (GE 7; Tr. 111-112). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and 
material information, and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication 
policy in the Revised AG.5 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole 
person” c
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does 
not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) at 
AG ¶ 18. 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. 
Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
5 Directive 6.3 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
 
7  
                                                     
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a 
heavy burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information 
enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring 
each applicant possesses the judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect 
the national interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a 
concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is 
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Applicant owes more than $49,000 in delinquent 
debt. Her debts became delinquent starting in 2003, and, but for three debts for 
which she provided proof of payment, they remain delinquent, indicating a history 
of failure to meet financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8  
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue. 
 
 Although Applicant's debts have been accruing for several years, they are 
not in the distant past, as they remain unpaid. The fact that most remain unpaid, 
despite Applicant's substantial income, indicates that they may well remain 
unpaid in the future. Her failure to make consistent attempts to resolve her debts 
raises questions as to her reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant had children at a very young 
age. Her first husband left her to support the children on her own, and her 
subsequent husbands did not significantly help with her children’s expenses. 
These factors had an effect on her financial status and were beyond her control. 
However, these events occurred many years ago. Since that time, Applicant has 
received the benefit of a clean financial slate after her debts were discharged 
through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2000. Nevertheless, and despite steady 
employment and a substantial salary, Applicant has accrued a significant 
delinquent debt load. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to resolve debts. Applicant was on 
notice that delinquent debts were a security concern after she completed her 
security clearance application in 2008, yet she has accomplished little in the 
interim. She has not sought financial counseling. Although a few debts are paid, 
she still owes more than $49,000, and her financial situation is not under control. 
Without evidence of a plan to resolve indebtedness, and steps taken to 
implement it, a good-faith effort to resolve debts cannot be substantiated. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputes several debts, including ¶¶ 1.f., 1.i. and 1.k. She 
appears to have some grounds for disputing the credit card accounts related to 
the card that was stolen. Applicant provided a letter from her ex-husband 
confirming the theft. However, the mitigating condition also requires that an 
Applicant take steps to resolve the issue. Here, Applicant claimed that she 
reported the theft, but provided no documentary evidence that she reported the 
dispute to the creditor or credit reporting agencies. None of her credit bureau 
 
 
9  
reports note any disputed debts. Only partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 
20(e). 
 
 In all, the partial mitigation available to Applicant under AG ¶ 20(e) is 
insufficient to outweigh the disqualifying conditions that apply. I find against 
Applicant  under Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate 
the Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented 
and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I 
have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or 
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; 
(7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the 
appropriate guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 As Applicant was a mature adult of approximately 37 to 42 years old at the 
time most of her debts became delinquent, her failure to respond to them cannot 
be ascribed to immaturity or inexperience. She has not established payment 
plans, and but for three debts, she has not provided evidence that shows focused 
efforts to resolve her financial situation. An applicant is not required to be debt-
free, or establish that she paid every debt. But she must demonstrate that she 
established a plan to resolve her debts and has taken action to implement that 
plan. Here, Applicant has not established such a plan, and she still carries more 
than $49,000 in debt, with no substantive efforts or reasonable plan to resolve it.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing 
on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has not satisfied the 
doubts currently raised about her suitability for a security clearance. For these 
 
 
10  
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.c.  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e. – 1.i.  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.j.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.k. – 1.o.  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.p.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.q.   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to allow applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
