 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 09-01382 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Nicole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On September 10, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 15, 2009, and requested a 
hearing. On August 21, 2009, DOHA assigned the case to me. On September 21, 2009, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for October 15, 2009. The case was 
heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through G 
into evidence without objection. The record remained open until October 30, 2009, to 
give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. She timely submitted a 
document that I marked as AE H and admitted into the record without objection from 
Department Counsel.  DOHA received the hearing transcript on October 22, 2009.                                
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j. She denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 
1.h.  
 
 Applicant is 65 years old. She is divorced since 1983 and has three grown 
children. She has three years of college and a technical degree in online programming 
and system administration. She has worked as a contractor in both the private and 
public sectors over the past ten years. From 1999 to September 2001, she worked as a 
communications contractor for a private company located in the World Trade Center 
Towers. She was then unemployed until May 2002 when she obtained a state 
government contract in her home state that lasted for seven months. From December 
2002 until May 2003, she was unemployed. She then obtained a position with another 
private company, where she worked until November 2004. For the next eight months 
she was unemployed. In June 2005, she obtained a two-month contract for a private 
company. In August 2005, she worked in private industry. In May 2006, she went to 
work for another private company until February 2007 when she became unemployed 
From May 2007 to April 2008, she worked for a private firm. She was then unemployed 
until September 2008, when she started her current contract position with a defense 
contractor. (GE 1.) 
 
 In August 2003, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy in order to establish a 
repayment plan for her delinquent debts, which were accruing as a result of periods of 
unemployment. (Tr. 25.) The case was dismissed because she did not timely file a 
repayment plan. At that time, she was trying to sell her house, which she purchased for 
$225,000, and was appraised at less than $190,000. (Tr. 26.) She re-filed for 
Bankruptcy in December 2003, hoping to give herself more time to sell. Although she 
had several buyers for her home, the mortgage company would not agree to a “short 
sale”. Despite depleting her savings and retirement accounts, she was unable to 
maintain her mortgage payments, car payments, or other expenses. (Tr. 47.) In July 
2003, the court dismissed the case for her failure to make payments to the bankruptcy 
trustee. (Tr. 26-27.)  
 
 The majority of the delinquent debt listed on the SOR accrued from September 
2001 to August 2003. As stated above, Applicant was unemployed for 15 months during 
 
 
 
 
3
this time. (Tr. 28.) Her financial situation started to improve in May 2005 when she 
obtained work on a more regular basis, after being unemployed for eight more months. 
(GE 2; Tr. 48.) Prior to the 2001 to 2003 time frame, she never experienced financial 
problems. (Tr. 43.) Her finances appear to have stabilized since starting her current 
position. 
   
 In September 2008, Applicant completed an e-QIP. In April 2009, she responded 
to the government’s interrogatories about her delinquent debts, including six of those 
subsequently listed in the SOR. She explained that she was unaware that the debts 
remained on her credit report and thought all of them had been resolved, except for the 
second mortgage on her previous house that the bank foreclosed upon in 2003. (GE 2.) 
She was not aware that she could resolve charged-off debt and believed that she no 
longer was responsible for it once a creditor took a tax write-off. (Tr. 52.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated May 2009 and October 2007, the 
June 2009 SOR alleged security concerns based on the accumulation of eight 
delinquent debts totaling $60,146. The status of each of those debts is as follows:  
   
1. (¶ 1.c) The $41 medical debt was paid on July 13, 2009. (AE A.) 
 
2. (¶ 1.d) The $487 debt was owed to a cellular telephone company. It was paid 
in August 2009. (AE B.)  
 
3. (¶ 1.e) The $31,000 debt is owed to a bank for a second mortgage that was 
on her previous home, which was foreclosed upon and sold in 2003. The 
mortgage amount was originally for $10,000. It was reported delinquent in 
July 2003. (GE 2; Tr. 36) It is unresolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.f) The $2,182 debt is owed to a department store for a refrigerator that 
Applicant purchased for her previous house and remained in the foreclosed 
house when she moved out in 2003. It became delinquent in March 2003 and 
is unresolved. (GE 4; Tr. 37.)  
 
5. (¶ 1.g) The $2,131 debt is owed to a credit card company for living expenses 
Applicant incurred between October 2001 and January 2003. It was reported 
delinquent in September 2008. It was charged off by the creditor. (GE 2; Tr. 
27.) It is unresolved.  
 
6. (¶ 1.h) The $15,000 debt is owed to a car company for the unpaid portion of a 
three-year lease that Applicant signed in September 2001. It became 
delinquent in September 2002 and is unresolved. (GE 2; Tr. 38.)  
 
7. (¶ 1.i) The $2,415 debt is owed to a department store for a computer 
Applicant purchased in September 2001. It became delinquent in March 
2003. It was charged off by the creditor. (Tr. 40; GE 2.) It is unresolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
4
8. (¶ 1.j) The $6,890 debt is owed to a credit card company for expenses 
Applicant charged while trying to manage her mortgage and other bills. It 
became delinquent in July 2004. It was charged off by the creditor. It is 
unresolved. (GE 2; Tr. 41.)  
 
 In summary, all of the delinquent debt, except $528, remains unresolved. On 
October 26, 2009, Applicant enrolled in a debt resolution program with a company that 
specializes in credit and debt counseling. The company is in the process of investigating 
her delinquent debts. (AE H.) She does not have an objection to paying the outstanding 
bills if she could arrange a payment within her budget. (Id.)  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of her budget. Her net monthly income is $4,809 and 
expenses are $3,849, including a payment on her car loan and large monthly 
medication expenses of $651. (GE 2; Answer.) She has approximately $167 at the end 
of the month for other expenses. She stated that all of her other bills are current. (AE D, 
E, F.)  
 
 Applicant submitted ten letters of recommendation, highly supportive of her 
efforts to obtain a security clearance. (AE G.) The Information Technology Director, who 
has worked with Applicant for a year, considers her to be very competent and ethical. 
(AE G at 1.) The Vice President of Operations where Applicant works stated that 
Applicant has “shown her business ethics to be nothing short of exemplary.” (AE G at 
9.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC), which are 
useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
 
 
 
5
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to this guideline is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns. Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” 
may raise security concerns. Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that 
began in September 2001 and remain unpaid or unresolved at the present. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 20 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s problems are ongoing, not 
isolated, and did not occur so long ago nor under circumstances that are so unusual 
and unlikely to recur. There is evidence that Applicant’s delinquent debts accrued as a 
result of periods of unemployment from September 2001 to September 2008 for a total 
of 30 months. The majority of the delinquent debts accrued from 2001 to 2003; however 
one debt became delinquent in 2008. There is some evidence that she attempted to 
responsibly manage her mortgages and other debts during 2003 through a Chapter 13 
Bankruptcy, however she failed to follow-through on her efforts. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited 
application. Applicant very recently contacted a credit counseling and debt resolution 
company in order to investigate and resolve her delinquent debts. Hence, there is 
insufficient evidence to indicate that the debts are under now control, as required under 
AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant provided proof that she paid two debts, demonstrating a good-
faith effort to pay resolve them and warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(d) to SOR ¶¶ 
1.c and 1.d. There is no evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(e) or AG ¶ 20(f).     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
7
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 65-year-old educated 
woman, who is dedicated to her job and has received recommendations from many of 
her colleagues. From September 2001 to September 2008, she experienced 30 months 
of unemployment leading to financial problems that were particularly exacerbated 
between 2001 and 2003, when the bank foreclosed on her home. Although she is 
consistently paying her current bills, she has not taken any action to resolve the 
approximate $60,000 of outstanding debt owed on her previous mortgage, car lease, 
and credit cards, including one that became delinquent in September 2008, despite 
being notified of the government’s concerns in April 2009.  She testified that she did not 
know that she could pay her charged-off debts and appeared to be unaware of the 
effect that financial delinquencies could have on her employment. To demonstrate her 
willingness to resolve the old debts, she sought credit counseling and debt resolution 
immediately after the hearing. However, at this time, she has not provided sufficient 
evidence establishing a track record of debt management.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant 
did not mitigate the security concerns arising from financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
