                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04388 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for foreign 
influence and foreign preference. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on December 18, 2008, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On August 31, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on September 9, 2009. He submitted a signed 
Answer to the SOR, notarized on September 29, 2009, and requested a decision 
without a hearing. In his Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. On 
November 6, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials 
(FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request 
for a security clearance. The FORM contained five documents, identified as Items 1 
through 5. The FORM and attached Items were forwarded to Applicant on November 
11, 2009, and he received the package on November 18, 2009. Applicant was given 30 
days from the date he received the FORM to respond. He did not respond to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on January 19, 2010, for an administrative decision 
based on the record. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran). The facts are summarized in the FORM at 
pages 2 through 8, and supported by 16 documents pertaining to Iran (Items I – XVI). 
The documents are included to provide elaboration and context for the summary. The 
facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge not subject to 
reasonable dispute, and included in government reports. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 45 years old, earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science at a 
U.S. university in 1992. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen the following year. 
Applicant married in 1995 in Iran. His wife was born in Iran, and became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2001. They have two children, six and ten years old, both born in the 
United States. Applicant is an engineer, and has been employed by a defense 
contractor since 2005. He completed his first security clearance application in 
December 2008 (Item 4). 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant's mother, three brothers, and one sister are citizens and residents of 
Iran. His mother is 83 and frail. He speaks with her by telephone several times per 
month, but as often as several times per week if she is ill. He is devoted to his family in 
Iran. He traveled to Iran when his father died, and to see a sister before she died. He 
talks with his brothers six to seven times per year. One brother owns a cosmetics 
business. The other two co-own a clothing factory. Applicant sometimes speaks to their 
wives, who are all housewives. He last saw these family members during his most 
recent visit to Iran in 2007. None of his foreign family members, or any friends or 
associates, have been employed or affiliated with the Iranian government. Applicant's 
in-laws are citizens of Iran. Both are registered U.S. aliens. His mother-in-law and 
father-in-law live in the United States with Applicant and his wife (Items 1, 5). 
 
In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant indicated that he has not 
received medical, educational, retirement, or other financial benefits from Iran. He has 
not voted or held political office there, and has not served in its military forces. He has 
no financial interests in Iran, but does have substantial financial assets in the United 
States (Item 5). 
 
After attaining U.S. citizenship in 1993, Applicant obtained an Iranian passport in 
1997. When it expired in 2007, he renewed it. He currently possesses this valid Iranian 
passport, which will expire in 2012. Applicant travels to Iran to see his mother, brothers 
and sister, and “there is no other reason except for family matters which are very 
important to me.” He traveled to Iran on month-long visits to his family in 2002, 2003, 
2004, 2006, and 2007. He used his Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran on each visit. 
When he completed DOHA interrogatories in July 2009, Applicant stated, “I haven’t 
destroyed or surrendered my passport and I don’t intend to do so.” He is not willing to 
destroy, surrender or invalidate his Iranian passport because, “If I give up my Iranian 
passport, it would be almost impossible for me to travel there using my United States 
passport.” (Items 4, 5).  
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional, theocratic, Islamic republic, founded in 1979 after a 
revolution that removed the Shah as head of state. Islamic law is the basis for the 
authority of the Iranian state. Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the country’s political 
structure, and ultimate political power rests in a Shi’a religious scholar, who is called the 
Supreme Leader (Item I).  
 
The United States has not had diplomatic or consular relations with Iran since 
1979. In 2006, the President declared the continuation of a 1979 declaration of a 
National Emergency with Respect to Iran because of Iran’s “extraordinary threat to the 
national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.” (Items IV, V).  
 
 Iran engages in clandestine efforts to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and 
other sensitive technology, and to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD). Additionally, Iran sponsors international terrorism, intervenes in the 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
internal affairs of Iraq and Afghanistan, undermines the Middle East peace process, and 
violates the human rights of the Iranian people (Items V, VI, VII, XVI). 
 
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism, providing planning and 
financial support for terrorist attacks throughout the Middle East, Europe, and Central 
Asia. The United States is concerned about the possibility that terrorists could 
eventually obtain WMD from Iran. Iran supports terrorists who attack Israel, as well as 
Shiite militias who have encouraged, facilitated and engaged in sectarian violence in 
Iraq (Items V, VIII, IX, X). 
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S.-Iranian dual citizens to consider carefully 
the risks of travel to Iran. Iranian authorities do not recognize dual citizenship, and 
consider Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens and their children to be solely Iranian 
citizens. Access to the U.S. Interests Section in Tehran may be denied. U.S.-Iranian 
dual citizens may be subject to harassment or arrest while in Iran. Such dual citizens 
have had their U.S. passports confiscated, and have been denied permission to exit 
Iran. Visitors from abroad may be placed under surveillance (Items I, III).  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guidelines B and C. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one 
relative lives in a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.6 
 
 Moreover, the country in question must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
its government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant's family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. Since 1979, the United States has had no diplomatic or consular 
relations with Iran. Iran seeks nuclear weapons, sponsors terrorism, and intervenes 
against U.S. interests in Iraq and Afghanistan. It seeks to obtain, through illegal means, 
U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. Iran is hostile to U.S. interests 
and actively works to undermine them. Further, it targets its own citizens and violates 
their human rights in order to advance its own ends. For these reasons, American 
citizens with immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Iran are at 
heightened risk of coercion, exploitation, or pressure.7  
 
 Applicant has immediate family members who are citizens and residents of Iran, 
including his mother, brothers and sister. He keeps in touch with his siblings by 
telephone about every other month. He has an even closer relationship with his mother 
and speaks with her a few times per month, and more often if she is ill. He has visited 
his family in Iran every year between 2002 and 2007, except for 2005. He admits that 
keeps his Iranian passport to facilitate these visits. His close relationship with his 
immediate family members in Iran creates a heightened risk of exploitation or coercion. 
Moreover, Applicant's ties of affection and obligation to his foreign family create a 
potential conflict of interest between his desire to protect them, if they were threatened 
or coerced by Iranian authorities, and the obligation he would have to protect classified 
information, were he to hold a security clearance. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B (AG 8), especially 
the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
6 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 It cannot confidently be predicted that Applicant would not be placed in a position 
that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound by 
strong ties of affection to his mother and siblings, citizens of a country that targets U.S. 
interests to obtain sensitive information, and violates the rights of its people. There is no 
record evidence showing that Applicant's foreign relatives could not be subject to 
coercion that would force him to choose between their interests and those of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8 (a) cannot be applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered Applicant's ties to the 
United States, including his many years of life here, his degree from a U.S. university, 
his service to the government through employment with a defense contractor, and the 
U.S. citizenship of his wife by naturalization and his children by birth. However, 
Applicant's foreign ties must be evaluated as well. His ties to his family in Iran are 
strong, as demonstrated by his frequent contact and his own statements that his family 
is very important to him. The fact that he has chosen to retain his foreign passport to 
ensure his ability to travel to Iran, though it undermines his ability to obtain a security 
clearance, indicates the high value he places on his foreign relationships. I cannot 
confidently conclude, based on these facts, that Applicant would resolve any potential 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) is also unavailable. As discussed, Applicant’s contacts 
with his foreign family are frequent and their relationship is, by his own admission, 
close. He has placed his ability to travel to see them above his desire to obtain a 
security clearance, as he has declined to surrender or invalidate his foreign passport.  
Given the nature of his strong family ties, the risk of foreign influence cannot be ruled 
out. I find against Applicant on Guideline B. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern under Guideline C: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport. 
 
Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States. Dual citizenship, in and of itself, 
is not disqualifying.8 However, conduct that constitutes an exercise of foreign 
citizenship, after becoming a U.S. citizen, is disqualifying. After becoming a U.S. citizen 
in 1993, Applicant exercised the rights of an Iranian citizen by obtaining a foreign 
passport in 1997, and again by renewing his foreign passport in 2007. He continues to 
exercise his status as an Iranian citizen by possessing a valid foreign passport. AG ¶ 
10(a)(1) applies.  
 
I considered the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11: 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a United States citizen or when the 
individual was a minor;  and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant obtained a foreign passport in 1997, and renewed the passport in 2007. He 
took both of these actions after he had become a U.S. citizen in 1993. In addition, 
Applicant uses his foreign passport. But for one year, Applicant traveled to Iran annually 
between 2002 and 2007. He used his foreign passport during these trips to enter and 
exit Iran because he believes he cannot use his U.S. passport to travel to Iran. 
Applicant’s exercise of his Iranian citizenship by using his foreign passport occurred 
numerous times since he attained U.S. citizenship. AG ¶ 11(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Applicant was on notice that his valid foreign passport represented a security 
concern since July 2009, when he received the DOHA Interrogatory. It indicated several 
acceptable methods to mitigate the concern: destruction, invalidation, or surrender of 
his passport to a cognizant security authority. Applicant declined to exercise any of the 
options. AG ¶ 11(e) is not available to mitigate Applicant's possession of a foreign 
passport. I find against Applicant on Guideline C. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct 17, 2000). 
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant is a mature, responsible adult who acquired U.S. citizenship in 1993. 
He has solid ties to the United States, having pursued higher education here and 
earned a degree at a U.S. university. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and both of 
his children are U.S. citizens by birth. However, Applicant also has strong foreign family 
ties. He has several immediate family members who are citizens and residents of Iran, 
including his mother. Between 2002 and 2007, he traveled to Iran five times to see his 
relatives. There is every indication that the relationship with these family members will 
continue, as Applicant has chosen to retain his Iranian passport to facilitate trips to Iran. 
Applicant's devotion to his family is understandable and commendable. Nevertheless, 
given the country involved, it raises security concerns. Iran is a country that targets the 
United States for sensitive information and ignores the individual rights of its people and 
of foreign travelers, creating a serious risk of exploitation. Finally, Applicant has chosen 
not to mitigate his possession of a valid foreign passport by surrendering or invalidating 
it.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised under the guidelines for foreign influence and foreign preference. Such doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C   AGAINST Applicant  
 
10 
 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.d.  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
