                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02995 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) as part of her employment with a defense contractor on December 11, 2008. 
After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated September 8, 2009, to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 15, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 2009, admitting seven and denying 
one of the eight allegations under Guideline F. Applicant provided a detailed explanation 
of the status of her debts. She requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 17, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me on November 18, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 23, 2009, scheduling a hearing for December 10, 2009. I convened the 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
hearing as scheduled. The government offered six exhibits, marked Government 
Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on her behalf and offered six exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibit (App. Ex.) A 
through F, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on December 23, 2009. Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant received the Notice of Hearing approximately December 3, 2009. 
Applicant is entitled to 15 days advance notice of the hearing (Directive ¶ E3.1.8). 
Applicant discussed with Department Counsel the hearing date of December 10, 2009, 
prior to the Notice of Hearing being mailed so actual notice was given more than 15 
days prior to the hearing. However, Applicant signed for the Notice of Hearing only 
about one week prior to the hearing. At the hearing, Applicant waived the 15 days notice 
requirement (Tr. 6-7). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all eight factual allegations in the SOR. I included Applicant's 
admission in my findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, 
and exhibits, I make the following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and has worked as a financial specialist for a defense 
contractor for approximately one year. She is a single mother with a five year old son. 
Applicant's monthly pay is approximately $1,960. Her son's father has a court order to 
pay child support. In the past, he has not been consistent in paying the support. Since 
September 2009, when he was jailed for failing to pay the support, he has consistently 
provided the monthly support of $800. This brings Applicant's monthly income to 
approximately $2,800. Applicant now lives with her mother to save expenses, she 
refinanced her car loan, and her son is now in school and does not require day care. 
Her monthly expenses are approximately $1,215 leaving her with about $1,500 in 
monthly discretionary funds. (Tr. 33-41; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated December 11, 2008; 
Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at child support court order, dated August 
28, 2009, and car refinance document, dated October 7, 2009). 
 
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 4, Credit report, dated December 29, 2008, Gov. Ex. 5, 
Credit report, dated April 23, 2009, and Gov. Ex. 6, Credit report, dated November 3, 
2009) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a medical debt for $728 (SOR 
1.a); a telephone debt for $60 (listed at both SOR 1.b and SOR 1.g), a medical debt for 
$612 (SOR 1.c), a credit card debt for $1,760 (SOR 1.d); a credit card debt for $4,879 
(and listed at both SOR 1.e and SOR 1.h); and another credit card debt for $5,756 
(SOR 1.f). The balance owed, considering that two allegations are have duplicate 
entries, is $13,560.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was current with her debts until her employer of over five years lost the 
contract she was working and she lost employment in 2002. She lost her health 
insurance and had medical problems of her own that required treatment and surgery. 
She became pregnant and turned to state Medicaid to cover the cost of her pregnancy 
and the child's birth. After the child was born, Applicant could not immediately return to 
work because the child was sick and could not be in day care. She took a position as a 
nanny. After a few years, the family moved and her son was healthy enough to go to 
day care. Applicant was unable to pay her past due obligations when she did return to 
work because the cost of her son's day care and her living expenses took all of her 
income. Since September 2009, her financial circumstances have changed. Her son 
started school and no longer requires day care. She now consistently receives child 
support. With these changes, she has been able to start paying her delinquent debts 
(Tr. 18-25; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, See, Medical letter for son, 
dated October 1, 2009, and day care expense).   
 
Applicant provided a detailed update on the status of her debts listed in the SOR 
(App. Ex. A, Status list, undated). The list shows that four of the debts listed in the SOR 
have been paid, and two other debts are being paid under payment plans. Applicant 
also provided a copy of her bank statement showing payment withdrawals from her 
bank account to correspond to each payment made on her delinquent debts (App. Ex. 
C, Bank statement, dated October 300, 2009). After receiving the SOR, Applicant 
sought out credit counseling. She learned that some of the debts were duplicates. After 
confirming the actual debts to be paid, Applicant established a debt management plan 
(Response to SOR. dated October 14, 2009, at Letter, dated September 22, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt at SOR 1.a is a medical debt owed for a foot surgery. Applicant 
settled the debt for $582.30. Applicant withdrew funds from her 401K account, and the 
debt has been paid in full (Tr. 21-22; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at 
exhibit A, and 401K withdrawal notice, dated September 25, 2009; App. Ex. C, Bank 
statement, dated October 30, 2009; App. Ex. D, paid letter, dated November 23, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debts listed at SOR 1.b and 1 g are the same debt. The debt has 
been paid in full (Tr. 22-23; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at exhibit B, 
Letter, date September 21, 2009; Gov. Ex. 6, Credit report, dated November 3, 2009, 
debt paid notice at 1).  
 
Delinquent debt at SOR 1.c is a medical debt Applicant settled for $459.51. 
Applicant used funds she withdrew from her 401k account to pay this debt in full (Tr. 23-
24; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at exhibit C, letter, dated October 2, 
2009, and 401k withdrawal letter, dated September 25, 2009; App. Ex. B, Debts update, 
undated; App. Ex. C, Bank statement, dated October 30, 2009; App. Ex E, Paid letter, 
dated November 7, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.d is a credit card account. Applicant settled this account 
for $455.71, and the account has been paid (Tr. 14-15; App. Ex. A, Settlement letter, 
 
4 
 
 
dated October 20, 2009; App. Ex. B, debt update, undated; App. Ex. C, Bank 
Statement, dated October 30, 2009).   
 
The delinquent debts listed at SOR 1.e and SOR 1.h are the same credit card 
debt. Applicant settled the debt for $2,439.74. Applicant's agreement with the creditor is 
for an initial payment and then five monthly payment until the debt is paid in February 
2010. Applicant made the initial payment of $1,008, and has made four of the five 
monthly payment of $367.94. The payments are automatically taken from her account 
(Tr. 25-30; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at exhibits E and H, letter, dated 
October 6, 2009; App. Ex. B, Debt update, undated; App. Ex. C, Bank statement, dated 
October 30, 2009; App. Ex. F, Settlement letter, date October 14, 2009).  
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.f is for a credit card Applicant settled for 
$2,776.81. Applicant will pay $132 monthly until March 2010, when she will pay the 
remaining balance of $1,984.81. Funds are automatically taken from her account each 
month to pay the $132 (Tr. 30-33; Response to SOR, dated October 14, 2009, at Exhibit 
F, letter, dated October 6, 2009, App. Ex. B debt update, undated; App. Ex. C, Bank 
statement, dated October 30, 2009).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
5 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds 
(AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. The delinquent debts listed in credit reports for Applicant are a security 
concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). Applicant incurred delinquent debt when the company 
she worked for lost a contract and Applicant was unemployed. She was sick and could 
not work. She also had a sick child which prevented her from working. Her son's father 
did not provide court ordered child support. She could not pay her medical debts, and 
used credit cards to support herself and her son. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
 
6 
 
 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). These mitigating conditions partially apply. Applicant was 
current with her debt payments until she lost work because her company lost the 
contract she was working on. She also required medical care and was pregnant. When 
her son was born, she could not work because he was sick and she needed to care for 
him at home. These conditions were beyond her control, and not likely to recur. She 
acted reasonably under the circumstances by paying most of her delinquent debts and 
entering payment plans on the other delinquent debts. Since her debts have been paid 
or are being paid, her finances do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control). The mitigating condition applies. After receiving the SOR, 
Applicant sought and followed credit counsel. There are clear indication her debts are 
either paid or being paid. 
 
I considered FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ AG 20(d) to 
apply, there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” 
of a good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is 
needed. Applicant has sufficient discretionary funds to pay her delinquent debts. She 
presented information to show that six of the eight delinquent debts have been paid in 
full. The remaining two debts are being paid under settlement payment plans and will be 
paid by March 2010. Applicant's action to contact her creditors and arrange and make 
payment of the debts and enter payment plans are good-faith efforts to repay her 
creditors, so the mitigating condition applies. 
 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant must establish a 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction 
through payment of debts. She is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that she 
paid each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that she has a plan to 
resolve her financial problems and takes significant action to implement that plan. The 
entirety of her financial situation and her actions can reasonably be considered in 
evaluating the extent to which her actions to reduce her outstanding indebtedness is 
credible and realistic. Available, reliable information about the person's behavior, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct 
may provide for the payment of such debts one at a time.   
 
Applicant established a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. Applicant presented 
sufficient information to show she is taking reasonable and responsible action to resolve 
her financial issues. She paid six of the eight delinquent debts. She has payment plans 
for the remaining two debts and is paying according to the plans. These two debts will 
be paid in full by March 2010. Applicant's management of her finances and past 
obligations indicates she will be concerned, responsible, and careful regarding classified 
information. Applicant mitigated security concerns based on her finances. 
 
Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
