                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03724 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 4, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 20, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 
2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on the same day, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on November 23, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Exhibits (AE) A through D. Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 2, 2009.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admitted the single allegation in the SOR. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and has worked as accountant for a government 
contractor since November 2008. He graduated from college in 2007. He is engaged 
and is planning a wedding in July 2010. Prior to working at his present job he worked in 
the banking business.1  
 
 In June or July 2006, Applicant’s brother and his fiancé purchased a house. The 
house was owned jointly and was financed based on their two incomes. The 
relationship ended and the fiancé wanted her name taken off of the house documents. 
Applicant’s brother attempted to refinance the house in his name only, but could not get 
a new loan. Applicant agreed to help him refinance the house. Due to his brother’s 
credit rating they would be able to get a better rate if Applicant refinanced the home in 
his name alone. He felt an obligation to help his brother, so he agreed to the plan. A 
mortgage was secured for approximately $498,000 and a home equity loan was 
secured for $124,000, both in Applicant’s name alone. His brother obtained about 
$4,000 in cash from the refinancing.2  
 
Applicant’s brother was to pay the mortgage payments and Applicant would pay 
the utilities on the house, which were about $400 to $500 a month. Applicant had been 
living at home with his parents, but when he bought the house, he lived there with his 
brother beginning in August 2006 until approximately June 2008. Applicant’s brother 
worked as an auto mechanic and at the time was earning about $100,000 annually. 
Applicant was earning between $45,000 and $50,000 annually, at that time. In about 
November 2007, due to a slowing economy, his brother’s income was reduced, and he 
could no longer pay the mortgage payments. Applicant had other expenses he was 
paying and could not make the payments on either loan. He attempted to “short sale” 
the house, but was unsuccessful. They attempted to take in a renter, but they still could 
not meet the payments. The house was foreclosed in June 2008. It was sold and the 
mortgage was paid. There was a deficiency of about $80,000 to $90,000 on the debt 
that was forgiven. No debt is owed on the first mortgage. The home equity loan was not 
paid.3  
 
1 Tr. 28. 
 
2 Tr. 20-24, 30, 35-45. 
 
3 Tr. 20-24, 32, 35-49, 52, 54. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant testified that he has attempted to negotiate a payment plan with the 
collection company, but they want a large down payment of approximately $20,000. 
They will not accept monthly payments until a down payment is made. He has 
contacted them a couple of times, but has not negotiated a settlement plan.4  
 
Applicant returned to his parents home and pays between $300 and $500 a 
month rent. He now earns approximately $41,000 a year. He works a second job and 
earns about $400 a month. Applicant owes $22,000 for student loans and is making 
$300 monthly payments. He has approximately $8,000 to $9,000 in credit card debts 
and is making monthly payments. He received $1,500 to $1,600 from his 2008 income 
tax return. He borrowed about $4,000 from a friend to pay for an engagement ring and 
other expenses associated with his engagement. He has about a $1,500 balance 
remaining to be paid on this loan.5  
 
Applicant understands he is responsible for the home equity loan. He explained 
has other expenses at this time and can not make the down payment. Since moving 
back to his parent’s home he has not saved money to pay off this debt. His brother does 
not have the money. They have not made a plan together to pay the debt. His brother 
does not work a second job. Applicant’s fiancé is in law school and will graduate in 
2012. She has student loans to cover her school expenses. When they marry in 2010, 
Applicant stated he will support her. He will move out of his parents’ house and find a 
place a different place to live. He hopes to start a master’s degree program sometime 
next year and attend school part-time. He hopes to get a better job after completing his 
master’s degree. Applicant stated that he plans on paying the debt, but he did not 
provide any details on how he plans to do so. He has not had any financial counseling. 
He does not have a written budget.6 
 
Applicant testified he has been working since he was 16 years old and paid his 
way through college. He had been diligent paying all of his other expenses and debts. 
He never asked his parents for financial help. He understands the debt is his 
responsibility and he took it on because he felt obligated to help his brother. He 
explained he is not able to fulfill his obligation for repaying this debt at this time. He did 
not provide any information as to when he will be able to pay the debt.7  
 
Applicant’s brother provided a letter confirming the arrangements he made with 
his brother when the mortgage was refinanced. His letter stated he is trying to work out 
an affordable arrangement with the mortgage company. No other evidence was 
provided regarding the debt.8 
4 Tr. 21-24, 49-52. 
 
5 Tr. 25-26, 29, 49, 55, 61-68. 
 
6 Tr. 56-60, 63-64, 70, 76-78. 
 
7 Tr. 56-60, 63-64, 70, 75-76. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant provided two character letters. One letter from his supervisor describes 
him as reliable, conscientious, and determined. He also has demonstrated leadership 
qualities. The other letter, from his fiancé, describes him as having exceptional ethical 
and moral character.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
9 AE B and C. 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.  
 
Applicant owes more than $136,000 for a defaulted home equity loan. He is 
unable and unwilling to pay the loan. I find the above disqualifying condition has been 
raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered the following under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because the debt remains delinquent and he has 
not made arrangements to resolve it. I find mitigating condition (a) does not apply. 
Applicant knowingly agreed to help his brother refinance his mortgage. He accepted this 
financial obligation knowing he was binding himself to a contract to ensure the 
payments were made. The debt is in Applicant’s name and he acknowledges he is 
responsible for its repayment. His brother’s income was reduced and he could not 
longer afford to pay the mortgage. I find the conditions were somewhat beyond 
Applicant’s control. However, I find he did not act responsibly under the circumstances. 
He has not worked out an arrangement with his brother or saved his money to address 
this debt. I find mitigating condition (b) only partially applies. Applicant has not received 
any financial counseling. It has been two years since he defaulted on the debt. He 
stated the collection company will only accept a lump sum down payment, yet he has 
not saved any money to put towards paying the debt. Rather he has other financial 
priorities he is focusing on. He has taken out a loan to pay for his engagement, he is 
saving to move out of his parents’ house after he is married, and he is planning on 
getting his master’s degree. He did not provide evidence that he has a plan on how he 
is going to resolve this debt. There are no clear indications the problem is being 
resolved nor has he made a good-faith effort to repay the debt.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a young man who has 
worked hard to put himself through school. He paid his bills on time and never asked his 
parents’ for financial help. He felt obligated to help his brother. He is also obligated to 
 
7 
 
 
pay a home equity loan that he incurred while helping his brother. He did provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude he is willing to pay this debt. He does not have the 
money to make the large down payment to the collection company. However, he has 
not saved any money to begin addressing the debt. He has not worked out a plan with 
his brother so they can work towards satisfying the debt. Instead, he has other financial 
priorities that include, getting married and supporting his wife, earning a master’s 
degree, paying credit card bills, and paying off a loan for his engagement. What is not 
included in his future financial plans is formulating a plan to pay this debt. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a: :   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
