1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01418
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the government’s Guideline F, Financial Considerations
security concern. Clearance is granted.
On July 22, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security concern under Guideline
F stemming from one unpaid debt. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On August 14, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the SOR allegation,
and requesting an administrative determination. On September 10, 2009, Department
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Materials (FORM), and DOHA mailed it to
Applicant. She received it on September 11, 2009, along with instructions to file any
2
objections or supplementary information within 30 days. She responded on October 19,
2009, and the case was assigned to me on November 3, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old woman with one child, age 16. She has been
separated from her husband for the past eight years (Item 1 at 29). Applicant served in
the United States Army from 1992 through 2000. Her discharge was honorable (Item 1
at 32). 
In 2003, Applicant enrolled in college. She earned a degree in 2007 (Item 1 at
13). The nature of the degree is unknown from the record. Since graduating from
college, Applicant has worked for a defense contractor as an engineer (Id.). Currently,
she is a lead engineer (Id.).
In 2003, Applicant opened a department store credit card, and allowed her
mother to use it (Item 5 at 26). Between 2003 and 2005, her mother charged thousands
of dollars to the credit card and made no payments (Item 5 at 4). By 2008, the
delinquent account balance had accrued to approximately $14,000 (Item 5 at 26).
In April 2009, the creditor wrote Applicant with a settlement proposal under which
it would close the account provided Applicant paid $2,910 (Item 5 at 11). Applicant
provided a copy of the creditor’s letter to the government in response to interrogatories
propounded in May 2009 (Item 5). Approximately three months elapsed and Applicant
still had not responded to the settlement offer, prompting the government to issue the
SOR. Approximately six weeks later, Applicant paid the creditor $3500 (Response to
FORM at 4). On October 16, 2009, the creditor wrote Applicant confirming that she had
settled the account (Response to FORM at 4).
Applicant maintains a budget (Item 5 at 10). She has $589 of monthly, after-
expense income (Id.). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept” (AG ¶ 2(c)). In making a
decision, the administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about
the person.
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 18). 
As of the date of the SOR, Applicant had a credit card account for approximately
$14,000 that had been delinquent since 2006. AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
Applicant’s mother accrued the credit card charges. In September 2009,
Applicant settled the account, and one month later, the creditor confirmed the account
settlement. Applicant maintains a budget and has ample discretionary income to
manage her finances. The following mitigating guidelines apply:
AG ¶ 20(b) - the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and,
AG ¶ 20(d) - the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
4
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Regardless of whether Applicant accrued the delinquency, she had a
responsibility to make efforts to resolve it. Instead she waited nearly six months to follow
through on the creditor’s settlement offer. Nevertheless, Applicant satisfied the account
and has ample discretionary income to manage her finances. Also, there is no record
evidence indicating any other financial problems. Upon evaluating this case in the
context of the whole person concept, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial
Considerations security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
