                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03913 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) as part of her employment with a defense contractor on January 22, 2009. After 
an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated 
June 30, 2009, to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 9, 2009. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 21, 2009, providing a detailed 
explanation of her finances. Applicant admitted eight and denied six of the allegations 
under Guideline F. She requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 24, 2009, and the case was assigned to 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
me on September 4, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 14, 2009, 
scheduling a hearing for October 22, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
government offered four exhibits, marked Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 4, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her behalf and offered two 
exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A and B, which were received without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 6, 2009. I 
kept the record open for Applicant to file additional documents. Applicant timely filed five 
additional documents marked Applicant exhibits C through G, which were received 
without objection. Applicant exhibit G has 22 attachments. Based on a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR 1.a, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.I, 1.l, 1.m, 
and 1.n. She denied the allegations in 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.j, and 1.k. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following essential 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 44 years old and has worked as a management analyst for a 
defense contractor for approximately two years. She received a bachelor's degree in 
December 2006, and is still considered a full-time student studying for her master's 
degree. Applicant worked either full-time or part-time during the time she was studying 
for her bachelor's degree. Applicant had periods of unemployment after receiving her 
degree, and worked a temporary position as an administrative assistant at a hospital 
from October 2007 until December 2007. She also held a second job as a hair stylist 
during this time. She started working with the defense contractor in December 2007. 
When the contract she was working on lapsed, she was unemployed from October 2008 
until January 2009. She worked from January 2009 until September 2009 when she 
was placed on unpaid leave pending the outcome of her request for a security 
clearance. When employed, her monthly pay is approximately $2,400 with expenses of 
about $1,800, leaving her $600 monthly in discretionary funds. (Tr. 22-24, 43-44, 56-65; 
Gov. Ex. 1, Security clearance application, dated January 22, 2009).  
 
Applicant married in September 1997. She and her husband have a son who is 
now a teenager. In the first years of her marriage, Applicant was employed full-time as a 
hairdresser. She injured her foot and could not continue to work full-time. She was 
apprehensive about her employment in the cosmetology industry, so Applicant started 
school to earn a degree and increase her changes of a good salary. She was a full-time 
student and a part-time hair dresser. She also became sick and had surgery in the 
summer of 2006 resulting in medical bills (Tr. 22-23, 44-46).  
 
Appellant and her husband became overwhelmed with debt during their 
marriage. She admits to living above her means during this time. They consulted an 
attorney and twice decided to file bankruptcy. However, they did not believe bankruptcy 
was in their best interest and the petitions were dismissed. After the petitions were 
 
3 
 
 
dismissed, Applicant and her husband started working with a non-profit debt agency to 
restructure their debt and make payments. They worked with the agency for about nine 
months, but did not resolve their indebtedness. The marriage deteriorated and her 
husband moved out of their home in January 2009, when Applicant discovered he was 
unfaithful. They are now separated. Under the court ordered separation agreement, 
Applicant's husband is to pay $461 monthly in child support and 53% of the arrearage 
on their house mortgage as well as pay other debt. Her husband has made only 
sporadic payments to her. Applicant has taken classes to renew her cosmetology 
license and she intends to continue working part-time in that field to earn extra income 
(Tr. 26-28, 40-43). 
 
Credit reports show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a judgment for 
$246 (SOR 1.a), debts to medical providers for $58 (SOR 1.b), $91 (SOR 1.c), $28 
(SOR 1.d), $29 (SOR 1.e), and $322 (SOR 1.k), $233 for a credit card (SOR 1.f), a 
telephone debt for $336 (SOR 1.g), a mortgage debt past due more than 120 days for 
$4,698 on a balance of $70,573 (SOR 1.h), a car debt more than 60 days past due for 
$1,341 on a balance of $8,903 (SOR 1.i), a cable debt for $22 (SOR 1.j),and a car 
repossession debt for $14,651 (SOR 1.l). Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcies in July 2001 (SOR 1.n) and September 2002 (SOR 1.m). Both bankruptcy 
actions were dismissed (Gov. Ex. 2, Credit report, dated May 15, 2009; Gov. Ex. 3, 
Credit report, dated February 13, 2009; Gov. Ex. 4, Credit report, dated February 4, 
2009).  
 
The delinquent debt in SOR allegation 1.a is a judgment entered against 
Applicant in November 2004 for $246. Applicant paid the judgment in July 2009 (Tr. 47; 
App. Ex. E, Receipts, dated May 14, 2009). Applicant also paid other judgments against 
her that were not alleged in the SOR (Tr. 19-20; App. Ex. A, Receipt, dated July 16, 
2009; App. Ex. B, Receipt, dated September 15, 2009). It is not clear if these judgments 
pertain only to Applicant or jointly to Applicant and her husband. 
 
Delinquent debts SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.k are for medical debts resulting 
from Applicant's visits to the local state-sponsored hospital. Hospital records show that 
the majority of Applicant's medical bills were paid under the military medical program or 
other insurance programs. Applicant also notes that her and her husband's tax refunds 
were applied to pay and settle the remaining portions of the hospital debts in 2007 and 
2008. Records show Applicant has a zero balance owed at the hospital (App. Ex. F, 
Receipt, dated October 26, 2009; App. Ex. G, attachments 1-22, Medical billing records, 
various dates).   
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.f is for a purchase from a mail order business. Applicant's 
husband placed the order in her name and was to pay the debt. He has not paid it and it 
is listed on Applicant's credit report since she is also on the account. She has not 
contacted the creditor nor paid the debt. She does not intend to pay it since it is her 
husband's debt (Tr. 30-31, 53-54). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.g is for telephone service. Applicant acknowledges this is 
her debt and her responsibility. She has not paid the debt because she does not have 
sufficient funds to do so. She will pay it when she is working and has the funds (Tr. 54-
55).  
 
Delinquent debt 1.h pertains to the mortgage on Applicant's house. Applicant's 
husband was ordered by the court to make over half of the mortgage arrearage 
payments on the couple's house. He has not made the payments. Applicant sought and 
was approved for a mortgage modification so she could afford to make her payments on 
her own after the arrears had been paid. Applicant should be able to afford the 
mortgage with her potential income without input from her husband. With the mortgage 
modification, her mortgage is now current (Tr. 33-35; 48-49, 59-64; App. Ex. C, 
Mortgage Modification Documents, dated August 13, 2009). 
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.i is a car loan for the car Applicant's husband drove and 
took with him when he left her in January 2009. Applicant had a car which she had paid 
in full. Her husband drove the other car and was to pay the loan. When he left, he 
initially took the car and refused to place the car solely in his name. He did not pay the 
car loan, returned the car to their house, and it was repossessed. Applicant has not paid 
the loan nor does she intend to pay it since it is her husband's car and responsibility (Tr. 
32-33; 48-51). 
 
Delinquent debt 1.j is for internet service which Applicant needed to continue her 
studies on-line. This debt has been paid in full (Tr. 53; App. Ex. D, Receipt, dated 
February 16, 2009).  
 
Delinquent debt SOR 1.l is for a car that was repossessed during the marriage. 
The couple had two cars while married. Applicant had one car and she was responsible 
for paying the loan. She paid the loan in full. Her husband had the second car and was 
responsible for paying the loan. He did not pay the loan and the car was repossessed. 
Applicant has not paid the debt nor does she intend to pay the debt since it is her 
husband's debt for his car (Tr. 35-37, 51-52).  
 
SOR allegations 1.m and 1n are for bankruptcy filings under Chapter 13. 
Applicant and her husband had financial problems during their marriage. They filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions on two occasions to resolve their debts. The petitions 
were dismissed when they determined it was more advantageous for them to pay their 
creditors directly rather then use funds for administrative costs (Tr. 52-53).   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
6 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. The delinquent debts listed in credit reports for Applicant are a security 
concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). Applicant and her husband had difficulty meeting their financial 
obligations while they were married because they lived beyond their means. Since 
Applicant's husband left her in January 2009, he has not paid his part of the debts and 
Applicant has been left with most of the family delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). Applicant's financial problems started during her marriage 
when she and her husband lived beyond their means. The problems continued and 
were compounded by his leaving her in January 2009, not paying his part of the debts, 
and not making court-ordered separation payments. Most of the debts are still 
outstanding and so are current debts. While the spending during the marriage was 
within her control, Applicant's husband's actions in leaving her and not paying his debts 
are beyond her control. During the marriage, Applicant tried to act responsible towards 
the family's finances. Applicant worked two jobs to add to the family income. She paid 
her part of the debts, for example her car loan. She went to school to earn a degree to 
increase her earning potential.  She restructured her mortgage to be within her ability to 
pay. Applicant and her husband twice filed for bankruptcy protection but both actions 
were dismissed. Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving debt. Since 
the bankruptcy was filed but dismissed, the filing is not of security significance except as 
an indicator of financial instability. Her actions indicate she acted responsibly towards 
her debts.  
 
I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Applicant has limited means to pay her delinquent debts at present since she is not now 
working while waiting a decision on her security clearance. She paid the internet service 
debt. The major portion of the medical debts were paid by insurance. However, the 
remaining part was paid when her state tax return was used to pay the remaining part of 
the debt. Since this was a payment action initiated by the state, it is not considered a 
 
7 
 
 
good-faith action. But the debts have been paid and are no longer outstanding. The 
remaining unpaid debts are not debts she initiated but which she inherited because they 
were initiated by her husband and she has a responsibility towards them as a joint 
holder of the accounts.  
 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Appellant established a minimal 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment, including evidence of some actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. She is not required, as a matter of law, to establish 
that she paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that she 
demonstrates a plan to resolve her financial problems and take significant action to 
implement that plan. The entirety of her financial situation and her actions can 
reasonably be considered in evaluating the extent to which her plan to reduce her 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. Available, reliable information about 
the person's behavior, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.  
 
 Applicant presented sufficient information to show she is taking reasonable and 
responsible action to resolve her financial issues. When she and her husband had 
financial difficulties, she worked to provide funds for the family. She went to school to 
improve her opportunities for better paying and more secure job prospects. She paid 
her debts as best she could. The unpaid debts, while still legally her responsibility, are 
more attributed to her husband's actions. I reach this conclusion even though some of 
the debts listed in credit reports for her are still outstanding. The unpaid debts are 
directly attributed to Applicant's husband's failure to assume financial responsibility for 
the debts he incurred. Applicant acknowledged and understood that she has a legal 
 
8 
 
 
responsibility for the family debts as the spouse even though she did not incur the debts 
and her husband is suppose to pay them.  
 
Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me without serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
