 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01323 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance questionnaire on October 31, 2008. On 
August 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 16, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department counsel was prepared to proceed on 
October 16, 2009. The case was assigned to me on October 22, 2009. On November 5, 
2009, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for November 18, 2009. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. The government offered Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 - 3 which were admitted without objection. The government requested that 
administrative notice be taken of three sets of documents. The documents were marked 
as Administrative Notice Documents (Admin Not) I - III without objection. Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
testified, called two witnesses and submitted two exhibits which were admitted as 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - B without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of hearing 
on November 30, 2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The following information is from the administrative notice documents: 
 
Iraq 
 
 In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power 
in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal from power, the United 
States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic institutions in Iraq. The 
Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free elections in 2005, Iraq’s 
new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in March 2006. (Admin Not I) 
 
 In 2007, 92% of Iraq’s exports were crude oil and crude oil materials. Almost half 
of Iraq’s exports went to the United States.  The United States’ ultimate goal in Iraq is to 
establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that will be an ally of 
the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has invested 
thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. Success 
in Iraq is a high national priority of the United States. (Admin Not I) 
 
 Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul, and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
dangerous, volatile, and unpredictable.  Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with U.S. 
and Iraqi aggressive governmental action against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in 
Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as state intelligence services. (Admin Not I) 
 
Jordan 
 
 Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern 
infrastructure. Jordan has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close 
relations with the United States for more than four decades. (Admin Not II) 
 
The Jordanian government respects human rights in some areas, but its overall 
record continues to reflect some problems. Problems include: torture, arbitrary arrest, 
prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement on citizen’s privacy rights, 
 
3 
 
 
political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, 
and movement. (Admin Not II) 
 
Under Jordanian law any male relative may prevent a woman or child from 
leaving Jordan by placing a hold on their travel with the Jordanian authorities, even if 
they are U.S. citizens. Jordanian law applies to dual U.S.-Jordanian citizens. (Admin 
Not II) 
 
The Jordanian government publicly condemned terrorist acts throughout the 
world, practiced strict security measures, passed new anti-terror legislation, and 
disrupted several terrorist plots. Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, the 
threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist activities 
against Jordan and U.S. interests in Jordan. Terrorist organizations have targeted the 
United States for intelligence through human espionage and by other means. 
International terrorist groups have conducted intelligence operations as effectively as 
state intelligence services. (Admin Not II) 
 
Syria 
 
 Since March 1963, the Syrian Arab Republic has been ruled by an authoritarian 
regime. Syria is currently included on the Department of State's List of State Sponsors 
of Terrorism due to the presence of several terrorist groups in Syria. According to the 
Department of State, the Syrian government continues to provide political and material 
support to Hizballah and Palestinian terrorist groups. Several terrorist groups base their 
external leadership within Syria's borders, and maintain offices in Syria. Syria is “one of 
the primary transit points for foreign fighters entering Iraq.” (Admin Not III) 
 
 The Syrian government’s human rights record is not good. The United States 
State Department notes the following human rights abuses occurring in Syria: systemic 
repression of citizens’ abilities to change government; arbitrary or unlawful deprivation 
of life; torture and physical abuse of prisoners and detainees; arbitrary arrests and 
detentions; restrictions on freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association; 
government corruption; violence; and discrimination against women. Syrian security 
forces have placed foreign visitors under surveillance, have monitored telephones, and 
have searched hotel rooms and possessions of foreign visitors. (Admin Not III) 
 
 A travel warning is in effect for Syria warning U.S. citizens of ongoing safety and 
security concerns in Syria. American citizens are urged to consider carefully the risks of 
travel to Syria and to take adequate precautions to ensure their safety. (Admin Not III) 
 
 On February 13, 2008, President Bush expanded a 2004 Executive Order 
implementing sanctions against Syria for its support of terrorism in the Middle East. In 
May 2009, President Obama continued the declaration of a national emergency, 
“[b]ecause the actions and policies of the Government of Syria continue to pose an 
unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of 
the United States.” (Admin Not III) 
 
4 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated August 15, 2009, Applicant admits to all the 
SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 23-year-old administrative assistant employed with a government 
contractor who is applying for a security clearance. She has worked as an institutional 
contractor at a government agency since October 24, 2008. This is her first time 
applying for a security clearance. She has a bachelor’s degree in global health and 
development. She is single and has no children. (Tr at 42-45; Gov 1.)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in the United States. She is a United States 
citizen. She was educated in the United States. She does not hold dual citizenship. She 
does not possess a foreign passport. Both of her parents are naturalized U.S. citizens 
who were born in Iraq. They met each other in medical school. They immigrated to the 
United States to complete their medical residencies in the early 1980s. They became 
United States citizens in 1989.  She has two older sisters who were born and raised in 
the United States. (Tr at 37, 41-42, 77; Gov 1; Gov 3) 
 
Applicant’s mother is a pathologist who works at a U.S. hospital in the city and 
state where Applicant was born and grew up. Her father is a physician who works at a   
hospital in Saudi Arabia. He moved to Saudi Arabia in November 2007. Applicant has 
had no contact with her father since August 2008. She discovered that her father was 
unfaithful to her mother. Her parents are in the process of divorcing. Applicant, her 
sisters, and her mother told him that they do not wish to communicate with him. (Tr at 
39 – 41, 68-69; Gov 3)  
 
Applicant grew up speaking Arabic at home. When she graduated from college in 
the spring of 2008, she learned of an opportunity to enhance her Arabic language skills  
by attending a summer course at the University of Jordan that was sponsored by a 
United States university. The course was titled, “Arabic for Speakers of Other 
Languages.”  She learned about the course from her cousins who were students of the 
professor who sponsored the trip. About 15 students went. Her mother paid for the trip. 
While in Jordan, she shared an apartment with other students from the United States 
who were taking the course. She lived in Jordan from June 2008 to August 2008. During 
her stay in Jordan, she volunteered four hours a week with the organization Doctors 
Without Borders. Her volunteer work consisted of playing games and overseeing 
various educational activities with Iraqi refugee children. (Tr at 60-62; Gov 3) 
 
When the course ended in August 2008, Applicant’s sister flew to Jordan from 
the United States and her father flew to Jordan from Saudi Arabia.  They drove to Syria 
which is about two hours driving distance from Amman, Jordan. They traveled around 
Syria for three days. One evening they had dinner with Applicant’s maternal uncle, his 
wife, and their three children. They are citizens of Iraq but are currently refugees in 
Syria. They left Iraq because it was unsafe. Her uncle and aunt are unemployed. The 
three children are students.  She previously met her aunt and uncle when she was six 
 
5 
 
 
years old. She has not contacted her uncle’s family since returning to the United States 
in August 2008.  She believes her mother still communicates with her uncle.  After the 
visit to Syria, she and her sister traveled to Lebanon for several days. They also 
traveled to Jerusalem. The purpose of their travels was for sightseeing. (Tr at 48-52, 64-
65; Gov 3) 
 
Applicant’s paternal grandfather is a citizen of Iraq. He served as head of one of 
the Iraqi government agencies from the late 1960s to the early 1970s. He also served 
as a member of the Iraqi Parliament. Applicant does not know how long her grandfather 
served in the Iraqi Parliament. He has not served in the Iraqi Parliament for 20 years. 
He is over 90 years old and is in poor health. She last heard that he was seeking 
medical treatment in Jordan.  Applicant has not had direct contract with her grandfather 
since she was six years old. She met him only once or twice. She does not have a 
relationship with her grandfather. In the past, she has had indirect contact with her 
grandfather through e-mails that her grandfather sends to her sister and father. (Tr at 
46-47; Gov 3; Response to SOR)  
 
Applicant’s maternal aunt is an Iraqi citizen currently residing in Jordan. She has 
lived in Jordan as a refugee since 2001. She is unemployed and is divorcing her 
husband. Applicant visited her aunt on several occasions during the summer of 2008 
when she was studying Arabic in Jordan. She talked to her about once a week and met 
her for dinner a couple times. Previously, she met her aunt when she was about six 
years old. She also met her in 2003, when she and her mother went on a two week 
vacation to   Turkey. They traveled to Jordan for about three days to visit her aunt. She 
has had no contact with her aunt after leaving Jordan in August 2008. Her mother 
communicates with her aunt. (Tr at 52-55; Gov 3)  
 
 All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States. She has no assets overseas.  
Aside from her paternal grandfather, Applicant is unaware of any extended family 
members working for a foreign government or in the foreign military. She does not 
provide support to overseas relatives. She is close to her sisters and mother. She has 
one friend, a United States citizen, who lives in Thailand. All of her other close friends 
live in the United States and are United States citizens. (Tr at 56-59)  Applicant has no 
immediate future plans to travel to the middle east.  There is a possibility that she may 
travel to Iraq on official business in the future. Her future goal is the join the Foreign 
Service. (Tr at 67)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter on her behalf.  She has supervised Applicant 
since February 2009. Before her interim security clearance was revoked, most of her 
contact with the Applicant was over the telephone because she worked at a different 
location. For the past two months, Applicant has worked with her in the office on a daily 
basis. She recently completed Applicant’s annual performance appraisal. She contacted 
Applicant’s colleagues and immediate supervisor to seek inputs about her performance. 
Applicant received the highest marks in all categories – leadership, attitude, efficiency, 
team spirit, and results. Applicant recently provided support to a U.S. - Iraq Business 
and Investment Conference. Feedback about Applicant’s performance during the 
 
6 
 
 
conference included the following: “[Applicant’s] exceptional organizational skills, 
superior communication ability in Arabic and English, professional demeanor, team 
attitude, and perseverance to get the job done were elemental to ensure [the agency’s] 
goals were accomplished, not to mention [Applicant] provided a tremendous service to 
our interagency colleagues.”  Applicant’s supervisor describes Applicant as dependable, 
honest, and trustworthy. (AE A) 
 
The program officer for supporting the Iraq mission testified on Applicant’s behalf.  
He is a foreign service officer. He has been with the government agency since late 
2001. He has held a Top Secret security clearance for 21 years.  Applicant has worked 
in his office as a contractor since 2008. He works with her on a daily basis. Applicant 
provides administrative and logistical support. She helps process employees who are 
deploying to Iraq. He is not her supervisor because she is a contract employee. He has 
provided positive feedback to her employer. She is very reliable, professional, and 
competent. She handles sensitive and Privacy Act information very carefully. He thinks 
of himself as Applicant’s mentor.  Applicant speaks fondly of her immediate family 
members. He has never heard her talk about overseas relatives. He is aware that she 
had the opportunity to travel in the area of the world where some of her relatives lived 
and that she met her family members when she was in the area. He is confident in her 
ability to protect classified information. (Tr at 16-26) 
 
The Travel and Training Coordinator for the Iraq Program also testified. She and 
Applicant started work on the same day. She possesses a Secret clearance. They 
interact on a daily basis. She states that Applicant is exceptional. She is very grounded, 
intelligent, and dependable. She is aware that Applicant has relatives overseas.  She is 
aware that Applicant’s mother, two sisters, a brother-in-law, and aunts live in the United 
States. Applicant is very devoted to her mother and sisters. She has never expressed a 
preference for overseas family members. She visited her overseas relatives in the 
summer of 2008, because she was in that area of the world. Applicant does not drink 
alcohol or use drugs. She is trustworthy. (Tr at 27-35)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
7 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(a) (contact with a family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group or country by providing 
that information) 
 
Applicant’s paternal grandfather is a citizen of Iraq, who currently resides in 
Jordan. In the late 1960’s to the early 1970s, he served as the head of one of Iraq’s 
government agencies. He also served as member of the Iraqi parliament. Applicant’s 
maternal uncle, aunt, and three cousins are citizens of Iraq who currently reside in 
Syria. Her maternal aunt is a citizen of Iraq who currently resides in Jordan.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create a heightened risk for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001) 
 
In this case, FI DC ¶ 7(a) and FI DC ¶ 7(b) apply because Applicant has contact 
with and connections to her family members in Iraq, Syria, and Jordan. Her extended 
family members are refugees from the Iraq war. Her contact with her extended family 
members creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure or coercion.   
 
Three of the six mitigating conditions under the Foreign Influence guideline (FI 
MC) may apply to the facts and circumstances of this case: 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the position or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.)  
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, 
 
9 
 
 
or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood it could create a risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation) 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) and FI MC ¶ 8(c) do not apply with respect to Applicant’s paternal 
grandfather. His past status as a high ranking official under the previous Iraqi regime as 
well as a member of parliament creates a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. Although he is now elderly and ill and Applicant has had minimal contact 
with her paternal grandfather, there is a remote possibility that dangerous elements 
within Iraq, or Jordan could attempt to use her grandfather to coerce or pressure 
Applicant.  
 
There is also a remote possibility that dangerous elements within Jordan or Syria 
could attempt to use her maternal aunt who resides in Jordan, and her maternal uncle 
and his family who reside in Syria to coerce or pressure Applicant. However, Applicant’s 
ties to her maternal aunt who resides in Jordan and her maternal uncle and his family 
who reside in Syria are not strong. Applicant met her extended relatives who reside in  
Syria in August 2008, because she was studying in Jordan, only two hours from where 
they live. She has had no contact with them since that visit and did not have regular 
contact prior to the visit, only meeting them once before when she was six. Applicant 
has had more contact with her aunt who resides in Jordan. However, she has had no 
contact with her after completing the Arabic language course that she took at the 
University of Jordan.  She has not had regular contact with her aunt while growing up. 
She met her twice prior to the summer of 2008, once when she was six and once in 
2003, when she and her mother visited her aunt in conjunction with a trip to Turkey.  
  
Regardless of the risks based on the status of Applicant’s extended relatives who 
reside in Syria and Jordan, her deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
United States support the conclusion that she can be expected to resolve any conflict in 
favor of the United States interest. FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies. Applicant was born and raised 
in the United States. She attended elementary, high school, and college in the United 
States. While she studied Arabic abroad in Jordan in the summer 2008, the course was 
sponsored by a United States university. Her closest familial relationships are with her 
mother and two sisters, all of whom reside in the United States. While her father resides 
in Saudi Arabia, she has had no contact with him in over a year due to a family conflict.  
Considering Applicant’s background and the need for personnel who speak the Arabic 
language, Applicant is the ideal candidate for a security clearance despite the risks her 
extended family members who reside overseas may create. Her deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States outweigh any potential for conflict. The 
Guideline B concern is mitigated. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.   
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to her uncle, aunt, and three cousins who are citizens of Iraq, 
residing in Syria. I considered the totality of Applicant’ family ties to her aunt who is a 
citizen of Iraq, residing in Jordan. I considered that Applicant’s paternal grandfather is a 
former head of an Iraqi government agency and a former member of the Iraqi 
parliament. I also considered that she has had minimal contact with her paternal 
grandfather, having met him only once when she was six.   
 
I also considered that Applicant is highly regarded at her current place of 
employment. She was born and raised in the United States. She was educated in the 
United States. The family members that she is closest to, her mother and two sisters, 
are citizens of and reside in the United States. Applicant has had minimal contact with 
her extended family members who reside overseas. She had the opportunity to visit with 
them in the summer of 2008, when she was in the area taking an Arabic language 
course at the University of Jordan. The course was sponsored by a United States 
university. She has had no contact with her relatives overseas since August 2008. While 
Applicant’s family members living in Syria and Jordan raise a potential security threat 
due to the very nature of familial relationships, Applicant’s significant ties to the United 
States mitigate the security threat. Her deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the United States strongly support the conclusion that Applicant would 
resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the 
United States.   
 
Guideline B is a security concern that affects applicants through no fault of their 
own. Applicant’s family ties and the current situation in the middle east make it a 
 
11 
 
 
substantial burden to mitigate the concerns raised under foreign influence. In 
Applicant’s case, her significant personal relationships and contacts within the United 
States outweigh the concerns raised by having relatives who are citizens of Iraq, who 
currently reside in Syria and Jordan. Applicant’s background and Arabic language skills 
would enhance the United States government’s mission to reconstruct Iraq. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. Foreign Influence security concerns are mitigated. 
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                              
   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
