 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00112 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns but has not mitigated Financial 
Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F and E, Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 17, 2009, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on September 14, 2009. A complete copy of 
 
2 
 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on September 22, 2009. As of 
November 25, 2009, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on 
December 7, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He attended college 
for a period, but it is unclear if he has a degree. He is single, with a nine-year-old child.1  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts and that Applicant misused his corporate 
credit card in 2006 and 2007, to make personal purchases in violation of company 
policy. The SOR further alleges that he voluntarily terminated his employment and 
made restitution. He admitted the debts totaling about $15,225 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.b. He denied the remaining allegations, with explanations. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he violated company policy when he used his corporate 
credit card for personal reasons in 2007. He used the corporate card because he was 
having financial difficulties. He informed his manager of his actions before the company 
discovered them. He was told that he would not be terminated, and a restitution plan 
was put in place. The charges were paid. Applicant voluntarily left the company in 
December 2007, for a position with another company.2  
 
 Applicant has experienced financial problems for a number of years. He listed a 
number of delinquent debts when he submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) in December 2005. He told an investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in August 2008, that his debts became delinquent 
because he was paying arrears on child support and had a large truck loan payment. 
He stated that he would pay his delinquent debts through a home equity loan. He was 
unable to obtain a home equity loan because of his credit history. No payments have 
been made on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.3  
  
 Applicant stated that he settled the $529 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, with a 
payment of $381 on August 2009. He disputed owing the $159 debt to a collection 
company on behalf of a telephone services company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He 
                                                          
1 Item 5.  
 
2 Items 4, 6, 10. 
 
3 Items 5-7. Any delinquent debts or financial issues that were not alleged in the SOR will not be 
used for disqualification purposes, but will be considered in assessing Applicant’s overall financial 
situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in evaluating the “whole person.” 
 
 
 
3 
 
admitted that he had an account with the company but indicated the account was paid 
when he relocated.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
4 Items 4, 6. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. He misused his corporate credit card to make 
personal purchases in violation of company policy. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved the two largest debts alleged in the SOR. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant stated that his debts became delinquent because he was paying 
arrears on child support and had a large truck loan payment. That does not qualify as 
conditions that were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. He informed 
his company about the corporate credit card, and he paid the charges. AG ¶ 20(c) is 
applicable to SOR ¶ 1.e. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that his 
overall financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not 
applicable to the other allegations.  
 
 Applicant settled one debt for $381. AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. That payment does not support a finding that he made a good-faith effort 
to pay or resolve all his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to the unpaid 
debts. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $159 debt to a telephone services provider. He told 
his company about his misuse of the credit card, and he admitted to owing two much 
larger debts. Applicant established that he has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.d. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to that debt.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s misuse of his corporate credit card was also alleged under the 
Financial Considerations guideline. That behavior, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It is also conduct that could create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are 
applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
Applicant informed his company about the credit card, and he made restitution. 
He voluntarily left the company more than two years ago for another job. He has taken 
positive steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
Applicant has mitigated the Personal Conduct concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has experienced financial difficulties for a number of years, which he 
attributed to his paying arrears on child support and a large truck loan payment. He 
misused his corporate card because of his financial problems. He informed his company 
about the credit card and paid the charges. He was honest about his delinquent debts. 
However, two large debts remain unpaid. There is not enough evidence in the record for 
me to conclude that his finances are in order.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns but has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
