1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02037
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s delinquent debt and his omission of relevant financial information
from his security clearance application generate Financial Considerations and Personal
Conduct security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his wife’s
financial mismanagement that occurred without his knowledge. Since discovering the
extent of the problem, Applicant has been working diligently to resolve his financial
delinquencies. His security clearance application omission constituted a good faith
misunderstanding of the question. Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations
and Personal Conduct security concerns. Clearance is granted.
On July 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines
F, Financial Considerations, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
I did not admit GE 5.1
2
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR on April 29, 2009, admitted all of the allegations
except SOR subparagraph 2.a, and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me
on September 16, 2009. On October 1, 2009, a notice of hearing was issued scheduling
the case for October 21, 2009. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received
eight government exhibits, identified as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and 6
through 10.  Also, I received 14 Applicant exhibits, identified as AE A-N. I left the record1
open at Applicant’s request to allow him to submit additional documentation. Within the
time allotted, Applicant submitted another exhibit, which I admitted as AE O. The
transcript was received on October 29, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old married man with one child, age 16. Applicant served
in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1986 to 1992. He was honorably discharged. While in the
Marines, he served in Operation Desert Storm (Tr. 40). Applicant earned an associate’s
degree in electronics technology in 1994 (Tr. 39).
In 2001, Applicant’s debts fell behind after he lost his job and was unemployed
for six months. Throughout the decade, he continued to struggle to satisfy them, as
steady employment remained sporadic. By 2007, Applicant had accrued approximately
$21,000 in delinquent debt, including an $8,300 federal income tax delinquency (AE E
at 2). He spent his retirement savings in an effort to make ends meet (Tr. 73, 93). 
Without steady employment, Applicant decided to pursue a job with a contractor
in support of the U.S. military in an overseas combat theater. Such jobs were generally
more lucrative than the jobs he had worked during his career (Tr. 107). 
In June 2007, a defense contractor hired Applicant to work as an x-ray technician
responsible for repairing systems that detect improvised explosive devices (Tr. 40). He
worked with this employer through approximately August 2008 (AE 1 at 12). He then
gained employment with a defense contractor in another combat theater as an
automatic data processing systems technician (Tr. 42). His work performance has
consistently been exceptional (see generally, AE N). He remains on his employer’s
payroll without pay (Tr. 74).
In the two to three years before Applicant took his first overseas job, his salary
averaged approximately $75,000 annually (Tr. 114). During the past two years,
Applicant’s salary has averaged approximately $100,000 annually (Tr. 45). Applicant’s
wife managed their finances while he was working abroad. Also, he “signed over power
of attorney for her” to file their income taxes and to “take care of all of that stuff” (Tr. 88,
3
89). He instructed her to use the extra income, totalling approximately $3,500 monthly,
to pay their bills (Tr. 48, 108). 
Applicant’s wife did not pay their bills, as instructed, nor did she file their federal
income tax returns for tax years 2007 and 2008. Instead, she spent the family income
on luxury items such as tanning salons and beauty salons (Tr. 48). Applicant was
unaware of the extent of this problem until he received interrogatories from DOHA in
March 2009 (GE 6; Tr. 49). Applicant was unable to confront his debts while stationed
overseas. Moreover, his ability to manage his debts was complicated by the marital
problems that resulted from his discovery of his wife’s financial mismanagement (see
generally Tr. 48; AE A). 
When Applicant returned from abroad in August 2009, he discovered that the
$21,000 of delinquent debt, as listed in the SOR remained delinquent, and that several
other unlisted bills, totalling approximately $4,400 had grown delinquent, including
among other things, car insurance payments, property taxes, and utilities, (GE G - J).
Using a $12,000 bonus, Applicant began satisfying his delinquent debt (Tr. 44-
46). On September 16, 2009, he satisfied his delinquent car note in the amount of
$1,053 (AE 6 at 2). On September 29, 2009, he paid the delinquent property tax for the
vehicle ($533 - GE D). Also that day, he paid the delinquent water bill ($160 - AE I).
Three days later, he paid a delinquent electric bill ($655 - GE J).
Applicant chose to satisfy the unlisted debts because, although they were newer,
they were more emergent than the SOR delinquencies. Specifically, by paying the
unlisted bills first, Applicant avoided any utility shut-offs, or a repossession of his car (Tr.
46, 56).
In October 2009, Applicant began satisfying the SOR debts. Thus far, he has
made one $300 payment toward the satisfaction of an IRS lien entered against his
property in 2006 (SOR subparagraph 1.a), by arranging a payment plan under which he
will pay the IRS $150 monthly after the initial payment (AE F at 3; Tr. 97). 
Applicant contends that he has made sporadic payments toward the tax
delinquency since 2006. He only documented a $300 payment in May 2009 (GE 8 at 2),
and a $300 payment in October 2009 (AE F at 3). Applicant has not filed his federal
income taxes for tax years 2007 or 2008. 
Applicant satisfied the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.c (a credit card
account his wife opened) for $425 (AE B), and arranged a payment plan to satisfy SOR
subparagraph 1.d, a bill stemming from an automobile accident Applicant experienced
in 2007 that totalled his car (Tr. 54). Because the car was fairly new, the balance of the
amount Applicant owed to the automobile financing company exceeded the amount his
insurance company reimbursed him for the loss (Tr. 55; GE C at 3). Although he had
GAP insurance, the insurer did not completely reimburse him for the difference (Tr. 55).
When Applicant returned from abroad, the delinquent account balance totalled
4
approximately $9,400 (Answer). In September 2009, Applicant contacted the insurance
company’s attorney and organized a payment plan (Tr. 54, 98). Under the plan,
Applicant is to pay the creditor $325 monthly until the delinquency is satisfied (Id.).
Applicant made the first payment in October 2009. (GE F at 3).
Applicant has not yet addressed the other SOR debts. They total approximately
$2,200. He plans to satisfy them once his employer returns him to active status.
Applicant and his wife have been legally separated since September 8, 2009 (AE
A). They are planning to get a divorce (Tr. 87). Applicant has physical custody of their
child. Under the terms of the separation agreement, Applicant’s wife will pay him $300
monthly for child support (AE A at 3).
As of the hearing date, Applicant had approximately $3,400 remaining from his
employment bonus (Tr. 87). While on inactive status, he receives approximately $1,600
monthly in unemployment benefits (Tr. 88). 
Applicant answered “no” to Section 27 of a security clearance application asking
whether he had ever had a property lien for taxes or debt (GE 1 at 30). Applicant
testified that he thought his answer was correct because, although he knew he owed
the IRS for delinquent taxes, he “didn’t have any property to lien on, except for [his]
vehicle” (Tr. 102). Applicant answered “yes” to Section 27a, requiring him to disclose
whether he had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt in the past seven
years (GE 1 at 31).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
5
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides that industrial security
clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Therefore, nothing in this
decision should be construed to suggest I have based this decision, in whole or in part,
on any express or implied decision as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant’s debt grew delinquent after he lost his job in 2001. Over the next few
years, his efforts at satisfying his delinquencies were hindered by difficulty retaining
steady employment. When Applicant gained a steady job with a salary that enabled him
to satisfy his delinquencies, his wife, the family’s finance manager, failed to apply his
income to the delinquencies.
Applicant was not fully aware of the extent of his wife’s financial mismanagement
until he returned from abroad in the summer of 2009. Since then, he has satisfied
approximately $4,400 of his delinquencies. This amount mostly consists of
delinquencies that are not listed on the SOR. Moreover, Applicant has only satisfied or
developed plans to satisfy three of the 14 SOR debts. These three debts, however,
constitute approximately 80 percent of his delinquent debt. AG ¶¶ 20(b), “the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,”
20(c), there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,”
and 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts,” apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
6
information” (AG ¶ 15). Of particular concern is “any failure to provide truthful or candid
answers during the security clearance process” (Id.).
Applicant’s omission of the 2006 tax lien from his 2008 security clearance
application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment,
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. Applicant’s contends, in
essence, that he was unaware a tax lien could be placed on personal property. His
misunderstanding is credible in light of his disclosure elsewhere on the security
clearance application that he had been more than 180 days delinquent on debt within
the seven years before completing the security clearance application. I conclude AG ¶
16(a) does not apply, and that there is no Personal Conduct security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Although Applicant’s financial problems were initially caused by a period of
unemployment in 2001, his progress at debt satisfaction has been slow given that he
has earned a lucrative salary since 2007. However, major factors beyond his control
have hindered his progress. Specifically, because Applicant worked abroad in a combat
zone, he had limited access to his financial information, and was compelled to rely upon
his wife to manage his finances. She mismanaged his income, spending it on luxury
items, rather than debt reduction.
In the first six weeks after Applicant returned from abroad, he satisfied $4,400 of
delinquent debt and initiated payment plans for his two most significant SOR debts. He
accomplished this while simultaneously negotiating a detailed separation agreement
with his estranged spouse that, among other things, transferred physical custody of their
teenage son to Applicant. Under these circumstances, Applicant’s progress toward debt
satisfaction has been commendable.
7
I was concerned that Applicant never verified whether his wife filed their 2007
and 2008 federal income tax returns. Applicant has been actively satisfying the tax lien
since October 2009. His wife had power of attorney over his finances as recently as the
summer of 2009. Gauging from Applicant’s testimony, their separation has not been
amicable. Under these circumstances, communication breakdowns and problems with
information sharing are axiomatic. I conclude that his failure to confirm his income tax
filings relates more to the deterioration of his troubled marriage than to any intent to
avoid paying his income tax debts. I am confident that Applicant, having resolved the
custody issues regarding his son, will resolve the outstanding issues regarding his
federal income taxes. Upon considering the relevant disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of the whole person concept, I conclude the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence of Applicant’s financial problems is minimal. Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
