                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03010 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 2, 2003, Applicant left his unit in state G without authority. On August 2, 
2003, he turned himself in at an Army base in state V. The military police ordered him to 
return to his unit in state G. He did not obey this order. He was charged with being 
absent without leave (AWOL) beginning on August 5, 2003. His AWOL was terminated 
by apprehension on May 18, 2005. His command discharged him from the service in 
lieu of trial by court-martial on June 8, 2005. Personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2009, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On September 11, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended and modified; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and 
modified; and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The September 11, 2009, SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E 
(personal conduct) (HE 2). On September 30, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and requested a hearing (HE 3). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on November 4, 2009. 
On November 16, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On December 11, 2009, the 
hearing notice was issued, and Applicant’s hearing was held on January 6, 2009 (HE 1). 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1-4) (Transcript (Tr.) 17-18), and 
Applicant offered four exhibits (AE A-D) (Tr. 26-27, 38-39). There were no objections, 
and I admitted GE 1-4 (Tr. 18), and AE A-D (Tr. 27, 39). Additionally, I attached the 
Hearing Notice, SOR, and response to the SOR to the record (HE 1-3). I received the 
transcript on January 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in his response to the SOR (HE 3). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and has worked for a government contractor as a 
dangerous goods specialist since 2006 (Tr. 7, 19, 20, 37; GE 1). He examines 
packages before they are placed on aircraft to ensure they are safe (Tr. 20). In 1998, he 
earned a general equivalency diploma (GED) (Tr. 7, 8, 19). He completed about one 
year of college (Tr. 7, 8, 20). On March 15, 2003, he went on active duty in the Army 
(Tr. 7). He held an interim security clearance for approximately 100 days in 2003 before 
he went AWOL (Tr. 7). He does not currently hold a security clearance (Tr. 7). He has 
never been married, and does not have any children (Tr. 19; GE 1). 
 
AWOL 
 
In 2003, Applicant joined the Army because he broke up with his girlfriend and 
was feeling pressure from his parents (Tr. 21-22). He did not have a job and they “just 
kept pushing on me and pushing on me until I eventually succumbed to them and 
signed up” (Tr. 42). He signed an enlistment contract for three years (Tr. 22, 41). He 
took the oath of enlistment (Tr. 41). He claimed he did not expect to be deployed 
because his recruiter told him he would be stationed close to home, and “there was no 
chance of me ever going, you know, going to war or anything like that” (Tr. 22-23). His 
initial training was at a post in state K, and then he was assigned to a post in state G 
(Tr. 23). He was at the post in state G about three or four weeks (Tr. 23). On July 3, 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
2003, his unit informed him he would not receive leave and he wanted to go home for 
the 4th of July weekend (Tr. 24).2 He went AWOL on July 3, 2003 (Tr. 24-25). On 
August 2, 2003, Applicant turned himself in at a post near his parent’s home in state V 
(Tr. 26; AE A). A military police noncommissioned officer ordered Applicant to return to 
his unit in state G (Tr. 26; AE B). Applicant did not return to his unit in state G because 
he lacked the funds for transportation (Tr. 27). Instead he returned to his parent’s 
residence (Tr. 28).   
 
While he was AWOL, he communicated with his unit (Tr. 29). His command told 
him to return to his unit; however, he did not do so because he was homesick and did 
not trust the Army because of the broken promise to assign him to a post near his 
parent‘s home (Tr. 28). Initially, he lacked bus fare to return, and then later when he had 
the money he was nervous and scared about what would happen when he returned to 
military control (Tr. 40). His parents received a letter from the Army explaining the 
negative consequences of AWOL; however, Applicant did not “want to deal with it [and 
he] pushed it to the back burner. And as time went on, it just grew harder and harder” 
for him to return to the Army (Tr. 40-41).    
 
On May 18, 2005, Applicant’s AWOL was terminated by apprehension (Tr. 30). A 
police officer ran the license number on Applicant’s car and discovered he was AWOL 
(Tr. 30-31). Applicant admitted to the police officer that he was AWOL from the Army 
(Tr. 31).  The police officer arrested Applicant and turned him over to the Army (Tr. 31-
32).  
 
Military records are generally consistent with Applicant’s description of his 
AWOL. On August 1, 2003, Applicant was charged with desertion on or about July 2, 
2003 (AE D). On August 11, 2003, he was dropped from the rolls (GE 4 at 4). On 
September 13, 2003, Applicant was charged with AWOL beginning on or about August 
5, 2003 (AE C). Applicant requested a discharge in lieu of trial by court-martial and on 
June 8, 2005, the command approved his discharge with an other than honorable 
characterization of his service (Tr. 33; GE 1; GE 4 at 7). 
  
Applicant said he was immature when he went AWOL (Tr. 35, 41). He has 
matured and would not make the same mistake (Tr. 35). He would serve his 
commitment and comply with his enlistment contract (Tr. 35).  There is no evidence of 
any disciplinary problems at work. There is no evidence of drug abuse in the last five 
years or alcohol-related problems. There is no evidence that he has failed to safeguard 
sensitive or classified information. He loves his job and would like to continue his 
employment and move forward with his career (Tr. 36-37).  
 
 
 
2In 2003, the U.S. Army was deeply engaged in a conflict in Iraq. The U.S. State Department, 
“Background Note: Iraq,” February 2008, notes, “A U.S.-led coalition removed the Ba'ath regime in 
March-April 2003, bringing an end to more than 12 years of Iraqi defiance of UN Security Council 
resolutions.” Civil conflict involving large numbers of U.S. Army personnel continued in Iraq throughout 
the period Applicant was AWOL. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline E (personal conduct) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the amended SOR. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior .  .  .  . 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing .  .  .  ; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s AWOL for about two years shows questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, 
which are characteristics indicating that he may not properly safeguard classified 
information. AG ¶ 16(d) applies.  
 
Applicant’s two-year AWOL is embarrassing conduct that adversely affects his 
personal, professional and community standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
Although there is insufficient evidence to establish Applicant is a deserter,3 
Applicant committed the offense of AWOL over 30 days terminated by apprehension.4 
He deliberately violated his enlistment contract when he went AWOL without legal 
justification or excuse for almost two years. This UCMJ violation violates his enlistment 
contract. A condition of employment for soldiers is performance of their military duties 
on behalf of their command, unit, and the Army as well as compliance with the UCMJ. 
AG ¶ 16(f) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
3Under Article 85, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 885, desertion 
terminated by apprehension carries a maximum punishment of dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all 
pay and allowances, and confinement for three years. MCM, 2008, ¶ 9e(2)(a). 
 
4Under Article 86, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 886, AWOL over 30 days terminated by apprehension 
carries a maximum punishment of dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and 
confinement for 18 months. MCM, 2008, ¶ 9e(2)(d). AWOL over 30 days not terminated by apprehension 
carries a maximum punishment of dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and 
confinement for one year. MCM, 2008, ¶ 10e(2)(c).   
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), 17(f) and 17(g) do not apply. There is no allegation that he 
falsified government records, or failed to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
His AWOL from August 5, 2003, to June 8, 2005, terminated by apprehension, is 
substantiated. There is no allegation he consorted or associated with criminals. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) all apply in part to SOR ¶ 1.a. The AWOL from 
August 5, 2003, to June 8, 2005, terminated by apprehension cannot be fully mitigated 
because it is too recent and serious. However, there are some positive signs of 
rehabilitation. No allegations of problems at his employment have surfaced. He has 
demonstrated remorse, an important step toward his rehabilitation. He received job 
training and has a good employment record. His security manager is well aware of his 
AWOL. Disclosure has eliminated his “vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress.” 
 
In sum, Applicant was AWOL from August 5, 2003, to June 8, 2005. His AWOL 
was terminated by apprehension. He had ample opportunity to end his AWOL over the 
673 days he was absent from his unit. I do not believe his claim that his recruiter told 
him he would not have to serve overseas, nor do I believe his claim that there was a 
commitment that he would serve at the post near his home.  He was 25 years old when 
he joined the Army, and he joined well after the attacks on the United States of 
September 11, 2001. His deliberately false official statement at his hearing about what 
the recruiter told him is too recent and serious to be mitigated.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant contributed to the national defense through his work for a 
government contractor. There is no evidence of any disciplinary problems at work. There 
is no evidence of drug abuse in the last five years or alcohol-related problems. There is 
no evidence that he has failed to safeguard sensitive or classified information. His 
character and good work performance show substantial responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation.    
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Because of his age and maturity, Applicant was well aware of the likelihood of serving 
away from his home, or possibly overseas when he joined the Army in 2003. He was 
AWOL beginning on August 5, 2003. His AWOL was terminated by apprehension on 
May 18, 2005. His command discharged him from the service in lieu of trial by court-
martial on June 8, 2005. He was also aware of the importance of providing accurate 
information in the context of evaluating and retaining a security clearance. He 
intentionally provided false information about why he went AWOL at his hearing on 
January 6, 2010. This AWOL and false statement at his hearing shows lack of judgment 
and a lack of trustworthiness. Such conduct establishes a serious security concern, and 
access to classified information is not warranted at this time.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not fully 
mitigated all security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors,”5 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
PARAGRAPH 1, GUIDELINE E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
