                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03271
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 25, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 2, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On June 11, 2009, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on June 26, 2009, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on August 20, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on September 1,
2009, scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2009.  At the hearing the Government
presented six exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 to 6.  The Applicant
presented ten exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through J.  The record
2
remained open until October 30, 2009, to allow the Applicant to submit additional
supporting documentation.  The Applicant submitted two Post-Hearing Exhibits referred
to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A and B.  He also testified on his own behalf.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on October 30, 2009.  Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 27 years old and has a high school diploma.  He is employed by
a defense contractor as a Federal Security Officer and is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admits each of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Credit
reports of the Applicant dated February 3, 2009, April 23, 3009, July 17, 2009, and
October 16, 2009, reflect each of the delinquent debts as owing.  (Government Exhibits
2, 3, 4, and 6).  After finishing high school, the Applicant maintained a job and moved
with his grandmother for several months and then got his own apartment with a
roommate.  From 2003 through 2007, the Applicant paid his bills on time.  The Applicant
attributes his financial indebtedness to his youth, the costs involved in his past
relationship with his fiancé, their separation and trying to start over.  Since then, the
Applicant has worked hard to resolve his delinquent debts and has submitted supporting
documentation to substantiate his efforts.  
His alleged past due debts are as follows; a delinquent debt in the amount of
$5.00 owed to a creditor that had been placed into collections remained outstanding as
of April 23, 2009.  Applicant indicates that he was not aware of the debt until his security
clearance investigation.  Upon learning of the debt, he immediately contacted the
creditor and paid it.      
A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $761.00 that had been
charged off remained outstanding as of April 23, 2009.  Applicant explained that he had
acquired a credit card for his ex-fiancé with the understanding that she would pay the
bill.  She failed to do so.  The Applicant set up a payment plan with the creditor in July
2009, and is currently making monthly payments of $25.00 a month.  He plans to
continue making monthly regular monthly payments until the debt is resolved.  (Tr. p. 30
and Applicant’s Exhibit B).
3
A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $36,583.00 for a house that
went into foreclosure remained outstanding as of April 23, 2009.  In October 2006, the 
Applicant and his fiancé purchased a home with the intentions of getting married.  They
made regular monthly payments on the home until the Applicant fell sick on the job,
suffering severe headaches that caused him to miss work.  His relationship with his
fiance fell apart and she moved out.  The Applicant tried to modify the loan, rent rooms
and/or sell the house for the amount owed on the loan, but none of these options were
successful.  From April 2007 through June 2009, the house remained vacant.  The
Applicant continued to pay for the water, the gardener and the lights in order to get the
home sold.  The real estate market declined as did the value of the house.  The
Applicant was forced to enter into an agreement with the bank under the “Short Sale”
program and was assured that he would not be responsible for any deficiency on the
original loan after the sale was complete.  (Tr. p. 45).  Applicant submitted a copy of the
closing statement on the sale of the home.  (Applicant’s Exhibits J and I).  The house
has been sold and the transaction is now complete.  (Tr. p. 32 and Applicant’s Exhibit
C).  Government Exhibit 6 states, “closed or paid account, zero balance”.
A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $143.00 had been placed
into collections and remained outstanding as of April 23, 2009.  This was for dental
services.  The Applicant has since paid the bill off in full.  (Tr. p. 35 and Applicant’s
Exhibit D).
A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $288.00 for an account
placed into collections remained outstanding as of April 23, 2009.  This was a telephone
bill that the Applicant had forgotten about.  The Applicant made arrangements with the
creditor to settle the debt for 40% of the debt which amounted to $115.32.  On August
15, 2009, the Applicant satisfied  the debt and it is no longer outstanding.  (Tr. pp. 36-37
and Applicant’s Exhibit E). 
A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $121.00 for an account
placed into collections remained outstanding as of April 23, 2009.  Applicant has since
paid the debt off in full.  (Tr. p. 38 and Applicant’s Exhibit F).
Applicant’s credit report also showed a recent delinquent debt owed to an
apartment complex in the amount of $245.00 for cleaning services.  The Applicant has
paid the debt in full.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B).
Several letters of recommendation were submitted on the Applicant’s behalf.  A
letter from the Applicant’s Chief of Security who hired the Applicant stated that the
Applicant is dependable, trustworthy and honest.  He gets along with everyone and
consistently reports to work on time.  He adapts well to all circumstances.  When he is
given a task he completes it in a timely manner.  (Applicant’s Exhibit G).  
A letter of character reference from the Applicant’s pastor who has known the
Applicant for five years, considers him to be a positive role model for the youth and an
4
exceptional leader among his peers.  His honesty and integrity is second to none.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A).
A letter of recommendation from the Applicant’s aunt reflects that she considers
him to be an outstanding young man that is well mannered, respectful, always trying to
help others (Applicant’s Exhibit H).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
5
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
6
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case.  The Applicant has contacted each of the creditors and either paid
off the debt, set up a payment plan to do so, or resolved the debt.  He understands the
importance of paying his bills on time and living within his means.  Under the
circumstances, he has made a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness, and there is
evidence of financial rehabilitation.  He has demonstrated that he can properly handle
his financial affairs and that he is fiscally responsible.  Under the particular facts of this
case, the Applicant must continue to pay off his debts in a timely fashion and maintain a
clean credit report or his security clearance will again be in jeopardy.
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligation apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(c) the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control and, 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for
the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a  willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, and it mitigates the negative
effects of his financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has
overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.
Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and
conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.   
7
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
   
   DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
