                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02469 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is financially overextended and lacks a track record of financial 
responsibility. He failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (SF 86). On June 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised; and the revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented on August 30, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On June 30, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on July 29, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 7, 
2009. Because of scheduling considerations, it was reassigned to me on September 10, 
2009. The hearing was convened as scheduled on September 24, 2009. The 
government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1, post-
hearing, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 29, 2009.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the government contractor was sponsoring 
his security clearance, but he expressed concerns about the possibility of not being 
hired because of the company’s downsizing (Tr. 28). Department counsel indicated that, 
to her knowledge, the government contractor was sponsoring Applicant’s security 
clearance. She produced a Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) document, 
dated September 23, 2009, showing that Applicant had not been separated and his 
sponsorship was still active (Appellate Ext. 1).  
 
After the hearing, department counsel produced another JPAS document, dated 
October 9, 2009, showing that the government contractor “Separated” Applicant as of 
October 10, 2009. Additionally, the government contractor submitted a letter (dated 
October 9, 2009) indicating that, due to the company’s downsizing, Applicant would not 
be hired even if he was to receive a clearance (Appellate Ext. 2). I find that Applicant’s 
employment with the defense contractor was terminated because of the security 
concerns alleged in the SOR. I also find that Applicant’s hearing commenced before 
Applicant’s “Separation” from his employment. Based on the foregoing information, I 
concluded I had jurisdiction to conduct the hearing and that I have jurisdiction to issue a 
decision. Directive ¶ 4.4; ISCR Case No. 05-04831 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2006). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h through 
1.k. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.g. His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old personal security officer who was employed by a 
defense contractor. He served honorably in the U.S. Air Force from 1988 to 1997. His 
military occupational specialty (MOS) was firefighter and he achieved the pay grade of 
E-4. Because of his MOS, Applicant held a secret clearance during most of his service. 
Between 2000 and 2001, Applicant attended college for some time; however, he did not 
complete a degree. 
 
He married his first wife in 1994, they were separated in 1999, and divorced in 
2006. He has two children from this relationship, ages 14 and 12, for whom he provides 
$852 monthly in financial support. He married his current spouse in July 2009, and he 
has a stepchild from this marriage.  
 
After leaving the service in 1997, Applicant was employed from January 1998 to 
November 2002. He was laid off and unemployed from November 2002 to March 2003. 
He was employed from November 2002 to July 2006, and unemployed from July 2006 
to July 2007. In July 2007, he was hired by a government contractor. His employer lost 
its government contract, and in December 2008, the new contractor required Applicant 
to submit a security clearance application. Under the sponsorship of his new employer, 
Applicant was issued an interim security clearance at the secret level. In June 2009, his 
interim security clearance was terminated because of the financial concerns alleged in 
the pending SOR and Applicant was laid off. He is currently employed as a personal 
security guard by the military attaché office of a Middle Eastern country in the United 
States. Additionally, Applicant has a part-time job as a travelling security officer 
providing security for ATM technicians. He is working a part-time job to earn additional 
income to pay his debts. 
 
In his security clearance application, Applicant disclosed having financial 
problems (being over 180 days delinquent on some of his debts) because of a period of 
unemployment. His background investigation addressed his financial status and 
included the review of January and April 2009 credit bureau reports (CBRs) and 
Applicant’s security clearance application.  
 
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent and/or charged off accounts, totaling 
approximately $27,000, which have been delinquent for a number of years. Applicant 
denied SOR ¶ 1.a claiming he paid that debt when he closed the account. He denied 
SOR ¶ 1.d claiming that SOR ¶ 1.d and SOR ¶ 1.e alleged the same student loan, that 
the correct amount owed was $2,889, and that the student loan was in deferment. He 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h claiming that both debts were paid in full. And he denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.k, because he did not recognize these debts.  
 
Applicant was allowed additional time to submit documentary evidence to support 
his claims. He failed to submit documentary evidence showing that he paid the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.f, and 1.h. Based on his credit reports I find these are his accounts and 
they are not resolved. 
 
 
4 
 
 
I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g alleged the same debt, accrued because of child 
support arrearages resulting from Applicant’s periods of unemployment. Applicant is 
now current on this debt and has paid all but $74 of this judgment (AE 1). 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is still outstanding. Applicant claimed that in July 2009, he 
attempted to settle this debt, but the creditor refused to accept less than full payment. 
He claimed he is trying to pay this debt as soon as possible, but failed to document 
what efforts he has taken or intends to take to resolve this debt. 
 
I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e alleged the same student loan, and that he owes 
approximately $6,426 (GEs 2 and 3, and AE 1). Applicant failed to present any 
documentary evidence to show he has made any payments on this loan or that the 
student loans have been deferred. 
 
Applicant disputed through the credit bureaus the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j. 
Both accounts have been verified as Applicant’s debts. I also find SOR ¶ 1.k is 
Applicant’s debt based on his credit reports.  
 
Applicant attributed his current financial problems to three main causes: his 
periods of unemployment; his separation and divorce; and his lack of money 
management skills. He never followed a budget until his recent marriage, and his 
earnings are not sufficient to pay for his old debts and current living expenses. At his 
hearing, Applicant claimed he and his wife follow a budget; however, he did not present 
documentary evidence of his budget or that he is following one. He also claimed he is 
seeking financial counseling through his credit union; however, as of his hearing date he 
had not scheduled an appointment to speak with a financial counselor.  
 
Applicant was earning approximately $3,200 a month, and his wife was earning 
around $2,600 a month. To correct his financial situation he and his wife are living with 
his parents. He does not pay rent, but contributes by paying some of the household 
expenses. He averred he is doing everything he can do under the circumstances to pay 
his creditors. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial problems. He claimed that he was 
overwhelmed by his financial and personal problems and ignored his financial 
obligations because he was not making enough money to pay his delinquent debts and 
his day-to-day expenses. After starting his current job, he claimed he has been making 
efforts to resolve his financial problems. He presented little documentary evidence of 
such efforts. Applicant highlighted his service to his country, and that he served 
government contractors well in prior jobs. There is no evidence that Applicant ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
1  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged 11 delinquent and/or charged off debts that have been 
delinquent for a number of years. Applicant resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g. The 
remaining SOR debts are Applicant’s delinquent debts as established by the admitted 
CBRs and his testimony at the hearing.  
 
Other than paying SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant presented little documentary evidence 
that he has paid, settled, or resolved the alleged debts. Other than contesting some of 
the debts, he did he present documentary evidence of efforts to resolve his financial 
obligations. It is not clear from his testimony whether Applicant has the financial means 
to pay his legal obligations, delinquent debts, and his day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting 
financial obligations, apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
7 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant established circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his 
inability to pay his debts, i.e., his periods of unemployment and his separation and 
divorce. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial 
concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He presented little evidence of debt payments, contacts with creditors, 
and settlement or negotiations to resolve his SOR debts. Because of his failure to 
address several small SOR debts, I also find he is not financially responsible. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, his financial problems are not under control. 
Applicant does not seem to have a viable financial plan to resolve his financial 
predicament or to avoid similar financial problems in the future. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), (d), and (e) do not apply because Applicant’s financial problems 
are not yet under control, and he has not participated in financial counseling. He also 
failed to show he made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. His actions cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 20(f) does not apply.  
 
 Despite partial applicability of AG ¶ 20(b), financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. Applicant has not demonstrated his financial responsibility by taking 
sufficient actions to resolve his debts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served nine 
years in the Air Force. He is a mature man and a good worker. There is no evidence he 
has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Applicant 
expressed remorse for his financial mistakes and promised to pay his creditors. He 
established some circumstances beyond his control, which contributed to his inability to 
pay his debts. These factors show some responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He presented little documentary evidence of debt 
payments, contacts with creditors, and settlement or negotiations of debts. Applicant 
has been employed since 1998, except for the previously mentioned periods of 
unemployment from November 2002 to March 2003, and from July 2006 to July 2007.  
 
 Applicant’s favorable information fails to show financial responsibility and good 
judgment. It appears that he has either made inadequate efforts to resolve his financial 
obligations or he is financially overextended. His recent efforts to resolve his debts are 
not sufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. His financial problems 
are not under control. He has not participated in financial counseling, and he does not 
seem to have a viable plan to avoid similar financial problems in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f,     
    and 1.h – 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.e, and 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
