 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01911 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 8, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 8, 2009. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 9, 2009, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on November 5, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional information. Applicant 
submitted a series of documents, which were marked AE E through K and admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 16, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain his security clearance. He enlisted in the United States Army in 1992. He was 
commissioned in 1997, and served on active duty from 2001 through 2003. He was 
honorably discharged as a first lieutenant because of a disability for which he received 
severance pay and continues to receive disability benefits. He has worked for his 
current employer since 2003. He has a bachelor’s degree. He was married from 1996 
until his divorce in December 2008. He has three children, ages ten, nine, and seven. 
He has joint legal custody of the children. His ex-wife has primary residential custody. 
He is current on his child support payments of $1,225 per month.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, with balances totaling $47,783, and first 
and second mortgages in foreclosure, with balances of $216,000 and $49,880. 
Applicant admitted owing all the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s finances were in order prior to his marital separation in January 2008. 
He submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) in August 2007, which did 
not list any delinquent debts. A credit report obtained in August 2007 did not list any 
past-due or derogatory accounts. Applicant attempted to make the separation as 
amicable as possible. He remained in their home and assumed responsibility for the first 
and second mortgages. His former wife was not working at the time. He gave her their 
joint savings of about $6,000 to $7,000 to set up a new household for her and the 
children. He withdrew $10,000 from his 401(k) retirement plan and gave it to her for 
furniture and other expenses. She believed she deserved half of the amount of the 
credit limit that was available on a credit card. He took cash advances from the credit 
card and gave the money to her. His children had medical problems that were at least 
partially related to the separation and divorce, which resulted in bills for co-payments 
and prescriptions. There were legal bills related to the divorce, which combined with the 
sudden costs of maintaining two households, placed an economic strain on his 
finances. He could not afford his first and second mortgage payments, and his house 
went into foreclosure. Applicant reported to his security officer in September 2008, that 
he was $4,277 delinquent on his first mortgage and $443 delinquent on his second 
mortgage. His security officer notified the DoD via the Joint Personnel Adjudication 
System (JPAS).2 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 20-25, 28-29; GE 1, 3; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-18, 26-39, 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3-6; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant stopped paying his mortgages in August 2008. He contacted the 
mortgagor and attempted to negotiate a lower payment. He was told that he had to pay 
the amounts due. He continued paying his other debts. The house was lost to 
foreclosure in the spring of 2009. His divorce attorney provided him some advice but it 
was outside her area of expertise. He believed his only recourse was to file bankruptcy. 
Applicant stopped paying his unsecured debts in about December 2008. He decided 
that he would save for a bankruptcy attorney, and then address all his debts in a 
Chapter 13 petition. He contacted his creditors and informed them that their debts would 
be included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He contracted with a bankruptcy attorney 
in September 2009, and paid the attorney $4,000 for his services. Applicant plans on a 
Chapter 13 “wage earners” plan. The bankruptcy has not yet been filed. He admitted 
that if he lost his clearance and job that the bankruptcy might have to be filed as a 
Chapter 7. He stated that he would self-report if he missed any payments to the 
bankruptcy.3  
 
 Applicant has not received counseling, but he has educated himself by reading 
financial materials and books. He will have to attend counseling at some point as part of 
the bankruptcy process. He has adjusted to the divorce, having to pay child support, 
and living on less money. He rents an apartment that he shares with a roommate. He is 
not accruing new delinquent debt and is living within his means.4  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of letters on his behalf. His job performance has 
been outstanding. He is praised for being honest, direct, trustworthy, forthright, 
conscientious, and reliable. His performance appraisals reflected that he has exceeded 
his employer’s expectations. His security manager certified that Applicant has not 
received any security violations.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 18-21, 34-40, 43, 46-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE C, D, K. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-34, 40-41, 45, 49-53.  
 
5 AE E-J. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant still owes the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial issues are recent 
and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to the costs incident to his separation 
and divorce. He gave his wife his savings and took out a loan from his 401(k) to 
establish her in a new household with their children. The children had medical problems 
and expenses that were related to the divorce. There were legal expenses plus the 
added costs of paying child support and maintaining separate households. These 
qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant paid 
his debts as best he could, but was unable to maintain the two mortgages. He reported 
to his security officer in September 2008, that he was behind on his mortgages. He 
eventually lost his house to foreclosure. Applicant felt the best recourse would be to file 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which is a legal means of addressing one’s burdensome debt, 
and have the trustee and court agree on a plan to pay his debts. He informed his 
creditors that their debts would be included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He paid 
 
6 
 
his bankruptcy attorney, but has not yet filed with the court. There are indications that 
the problem is being resolved. He has not received formal financial counseling. 
Applicant receives partial consideration under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c). His actions do not 
qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.6 AG 
¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. I considered 
Applicant’s honorable military service and his steady employment record. His finances 
were in order prior to his marital separation in January 2008, as verified by a 2007 credit 
report. Applicant has retained an attorney to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He informed his 
                                                          
6 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
creditors that their debts would be included in his bankruptcy plan. His finances have 
stabilized, and he is not incurring new delinquent debt. He stated that he would report to 
his security manager if he did not comply with the terms of his bankruptcy plan. That 
statement is credible since he self-reported when he was behind on his mortgages. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
