1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-00349
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-86) on October 17,
2008. On August 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005,
which are effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In her August 10, 2009, response, Applicant admitted 27 of 28 allegations set
forth in the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me on October
7, 2009. The parties agreed to a hearing date of November 19, 2009. A notice of
hearing was issued to that effect on October 16, 2009. The notice was reissued on
November 10, 2009, reflecting a change in the hearing time. The hearing was convened
as scheduled. Department Counsel introduced eight documents accepted into the
record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-8. Applicant was accompanied by her
mother, who gave testimony on her daughter’s behalf. Applicant also gave testimony
 Tr. 41.      1
 Tr. 31.      2
 Tr. 23. The disability payments received were less than Applicant’s regular salary.       3
 Tr. 19-20.      4
 Tr. 29. Applicant was paid benefits retroactively back to her November 2007 termination date.      5
 Tr. 30. Prior to her unemployment, Applicant was in good standing with most or all of her accounts.      6
2
and was examined by Department Counsel. Applicant introduced six documents, which
were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. A-F. She was given until
December 4, 2009, to supplement the record with any additional documents. The
transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on November 24, 2009. The record was
closed on December 7, 2009.
On December 11, 2009, Applicant submitted one additional document, which
was forwarded to me on December 15, 2009. Department Counsel posed no objection
to the document, noting it was “helpful in completing the record.” It was accepted into
the record as Ex. G on December 18, 2009, and the record was closed. Based on a
review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant met her burden
regarding the financial considerations security concerns raised. Security clearance is
granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old facilities manager/property administrator who has
worked for the same government contractor for over one year. She has earned a high
school diploma. Applicant is a single mother who has never received child support.1
She joined a company in 1996 and received a security clearance in 2002. Between
2002 and 2004, Applicant acquired numerous credit cards, most of which had minor
credit limits.  She lost her job in 2005 due to a reduction in force. She found new2
employment within a few weeks, but the position paid about $14,000 less in annual
salary. 
In the summer of 2007, Applicant took temporary leave from her employment
and received medical disability payments while she underwent foot surgery. Her doctor
repeatedly extended her recuperation period.  As she prepared to return to work in3
November 2007, her employment was terminated. She filed for unemployment benefits,
but her claim was denied because her company reported that she “left her position and
didn’t notify them of the extensions.”  She appealed the denial, submitting evidence of4
her correspondence with her supervisor regarding her circumstances. She was
awarded unemployment compensation in February 2008.  Without income for four5
months, however, many of her credit cards became past due.  6
 Tr. 21. “I had family I had to pay back. I had friends I had to pay back. Other things, I had to get caught      7
up. And there was just really no way to get all of that rolling and then get the fees paid to get to a good
standing and, then, I went in for counseling for bankruptcy and decided to do the bankruptcy.”
 Tr. 36.      8
 Tr. 37.      9
 Id.      10
 Tr. 37-38.      11
 Tr. 41.      12
 Tr. 40.      13
 Applicant possessed approximately 30 credit cards. Most of these cards carried modest credit limits,      14
ranging from $500 to $1,000. Tr. 30-31. 
 Applicant denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, but provided no evidence the account at issue had been paid.      15
3
While the unemployment benefits awarded in February 2008 helped her
financially, they expired in May 2008. Meanwhile, neither her job counseling nor job
hunting proved to be effective, further vexing her desire to honor her debts. Although
unemployment benefits were reinitiated in August 2008, she was hired by her present
employer the next month. 
Despite her new-found employment, eight combined months of unemployment
left her significantly in debt. Although she tried to address her debts, the effort was
“overwhelming.”  She ultimately petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection on July7
29, 2009. She received credit management counseling and devised a budget.  As a8
result of this counseling, Applicant ceased her acquisition of new credit cards. She now
limits her use of credit and tries to use them only for emergency situations.”  The9
bankruptcy action and this process has been a learning experience.  She now10
understands the pitfalls of credit cards, the way interest compounds, and how minimum
payments make little headway toward paying off one’s purchases.  Today, Applicant11
lives within her means.
At work, Applicant has been entrusted with handling funds and has performed
her functions with those funds successfully and responsibly.  She is considered a12
reliable employee and has maintained her job without difficulty. She has had no
subsequent podiatric or other medical issues. Her mother corroborated Applicant’s
version of Applicant’s recent professional and financial difficulties. The mother noted
that her daughter is responsible, citing specifically to her daughter’s successful single
parenting and her genuine efforts toward honoring obligations to family and friends.  13
At issue in the SOR are 28 allegations. Each allegation represents a separate
financial obligation. Most of the allegations concern credit cards.  A cumulative debt of14
approximately $21,000 is at issue. Applicant admitted 27 of the accounts at issue.  She15
 Ex. G (2009 Bankruptcy Discharge and Schedule F [Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims]).      16
 Tr. 33-34. In noting “that with only a possible couple of exceptions, all the debts included in the [SOR] are      17
listed on the bankruptcy Schedule F petition. . . ,” Department Counsel stated that the possible exceptions
were, in all likelihood, “either duplicates, or they’re collection agencies for debts that are covered under a
different name and they’re in the petition.” Tr. 34. W ith regard to any such exceptions, it was  concluded that
the government has “no concerns with the two or three exceptions.” Id. I agree.
 Tr. 39. This conclusion was expressed after a thorough examination of Applicant regarding her past and      18
present use of credit. See, e.g., Tr. 36-37. 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      19
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      20
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      21
4
demonstrated that the admitted accounts were included in Schedule F of her
bankruptcy petition and she offered a copy of her Bankruptcy Court Discharge of
Debtor.  The government stipulated that the 2009 bankruptcy discharge included all or16
substantially all of the debts at issue  and acknowledged that “Applicant has presented17
evidence in mitigation on [sic] the government’s security concerns. . . .”18
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these
guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and
commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a19
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  20 21
 Id.      22
 Id.      23
 AG ¶ 18, which also notes, “An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage      24
in illegal acts to generate funds.”
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access22
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.23
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is the most pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The Directive sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions under24
this guideline. Here, Applicant acquired approximately $21,000 in delinquent debt
between 2005 and 2008, principally comprised of numerous overdue credit card
balances. Therefore, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 9(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant’s acquisition of delinquent debt mainly occurred between 2005 and
2008, when she was subject to a 2005 reduction in force and underwent necessary
podiatric surgery in 2007. As a result of her protracted recovery period, she was
6
terminated from her job. This situation was followed by a delay in receiving
unemployment benefits, followed by difficulty in finding new employment. Lacking
stable income during these periods, she became delinquent on her previously current
credit card accounts despite her desire to honor her debts. Since recovering from her
surgery, her health has been good. She has been able to maintain steady employment
and demonstrate her reliability with regard to office and personal finances. FC MC AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. 
As noted, Applicant was terminated from her employment in 2005 due to a
reduction in force. Necessary surgery and a protracted recovery in 2007 caused her to
be let go from her next position. For the next year, she faced difficulty securing
appropriate unemployment benefits and finding a new position despite her best efforts.
Throughout this time, she only received intermittent state aid. Her credit cards became
past-due to the point she was overwhelmed when she tried to manage them after she
found new employment. Given these facts, FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that
resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. 
Applicant received financial counseling as part of the bankruptcy process. It
brought Applicant clarity with regard to the potential hazards of unplanned credit card
use, the false allure of minimum payments, and the need to first consider the use of
credit in terms of one’s overall financial means. As for the debt she acquired between
2005 and 2008, her debts were successfully discharged through bankruptcy. She is
repaying debts to family and friends. She manages office funds reliably and is now
living within her means. Consequently, FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control). In contrast, however, the Appeal Board declines
to acknowledge bankruptcy as a good-faith approach toward resolving one’s debts.
Therefore, FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.
In presenting her case, Applicant demonstrated how easily an adverse change in
financial circumstances can affect credit and credit cards which were previously in good
standing. But for her periods of unemployment and reduced income, there is no reason
to believe any of her accounts would have become delinquent and triggered an adverse
entry on her credit report. Overwhelmed and incapable of ameliorating her financial
situation on her own after adversity struck, she successfully sought bankruptcy
protection. 
While bankruptcy does not provide evidence that an applicant satisfied her debts
through her own resources, it is a legally recognized method for resolving one’s debts.
More importantly, Applicant demonstrated a superior understanding of the risks
associated with using credit cards, has committed herself to using them only for
emergencies, and has learned the importance of living within her means at all times,
both good and bad. While it could be argued that additional time is needed to gauge
7
how Applicant manages her income, her financial management while employed has
never been at issue. The only test of whether history will repeat itself is if she were to
lose her job, face difficulty qualifying for unemployment, and endure a protracted period
of unemployment. A repeat of such a confluence of events is unlikely. Therefore,
additional time to demonstrate her financial abilities under her current circumstances
would prove to be superfluous. There is no evidence that Applicant has poor self-
control or is unwilling to abide by rules. She has benefited from credit and financial
counseling. Her reliability has been proven at home and at work. In light of these
particular circumstances, Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant’s testimony was highly credible. With regard to the “whole person,”
many factors speak in her favor. She is a mature woman who has raised a child without
financial aid. She persisted in her pursuit of employment despite adverse personal
conditions during a downturn in the national economy. She recognized that she was
financially “overwhelmed” after her periods of unemployment and responsibly sought to
address her situation. Her delinquent debt was caused by circumstances beyond her
control. She has learned that although she had her credit cards under control and in
timely payment before she lost her job, an unexpected professional downturn can
jeopardize otherwise well-balanced books.
Speaking against Applicant is her past use of credit cards. Between 2002 and
2005 she acquired a large number of relatively modest credit cards. She did so as a
mature woman fully aware of her income, financial resources, and obligations. While
she was able to keep current on her balances while employed, she lacked sufficient
financial reserves to meet her minimum payments when her circumstances were
reversed. While those reversals were beyond her control, prior financial counseling
8
could have prepared her for such adverse contingencies. In Applicant’s situation, she
sought bankruptcy protection and received credit counseling that taught her the risks of
credit card reliance. Today, she is employed, derives a regular income, lives within her
means, is debt free, and understands how to avoid setting herself up for potential credit
card problems in the future. In her highly credible testimony and in response to
examination by the government, she demonstrated her commitment to future restraint.
In light of the unique circumstances presented in this case, I find finance-based security
concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a – 1.bb For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
