 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01265 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on October 8, 2008. On July 13, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Misconduct and, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 7, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 24, 
2009. The case was assigned to me on September 28, 2009. On October 15, 2009, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for November 3, 2009. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The government offered eight exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 8 without objection. Applicant testified, and 
offered no exhibits. The transcript was received on November 10, 2009. Based upon a 
 
2 
 
 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR pursuant to ¶ 
E3.1.17 of the Directive in order to conform with the evidence. Applicant had no 
objection. The SOR was amended to read as follows: 
 
1.e.  You were arrested on or about September 30, 2009, in the District of  
Colombia and charged with Driving Under the Influence. Your case 
remains pending as of November 3, 2009.  
 
 2.a.  Between 1996 and 2006, you were arrested for four alcohol-related 
charges as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e above.  
 
 The beginning phrase of SOR ¶ 2.b was changed from “During the fall of the 
2007..” to “Some time prior to May 2001…”  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations.   
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old financial analyst with a Department of Defense 
contractor who seeks a security clearance.  He has been employed with his company 
since September 2008. From June 1992 to May 2001, Applicant served on active duty 
in the United States Army. He received a medical discharge. He separated as an E-5 
with an honorable discharge. He previously held a security clearance during his active 
duty service. He has a bachelor’s degree in business administration and currently takes 
graduate school classes. He is single and has no children. He pays approximately $300 
a month towards his niece’s private school tuition. (Tr at 5-8, 30-32; Gov 1; Gov 3)   
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he was arrested and charged with 
offenses related to driving while intoxicated on four occasions between1996 and 2005.  
 
In 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence of 
Alcohol. He was found guilty, fined $700, and placed on one year probation. (Tr at 33; 
Gov 2 at 11; Gov 4; Gov 7 at 2)  
 
On July 24, 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol, Refusal, Operating After Suspension, Failure to Maintain Control, 
and Open Container of Alcohol within a Motor Vehicle.  After a night of socializing at the 
club with friends, he was stopped by the military police because of his erratic driving on 
base. He failed a series of field sobriety tests. He appeared before the U.S. Magistrate 
and was found guilty of all the charges with the exception of Operating After 
Suspension. On April 4, 2000, he was sentenced to three years supervised probation 
 
3 
 
 
with special conditions. He was ordered to enter and complete ASAP (alcohol 
awareness counseling), submit to substance abuse testing and treatment, and his 
license was restricted. (Tr at 37-39; Gov 2 at 11; Gov 5; Gov 8 at 8- 13) On April, 2001, 
Appellant’s probation was revoked as a result of the February 18, 2001 Driving While 
Intoxicated and Operating After Suspension arrest described in the below paragraph. 
He served 45 days in jail, his probation was extended one year, and his license was 
suspended for one year. (Gov 8 at 12-13)   
 
On February 18, 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Intoxicated, Second Offense, and Operating After Suspension. The military police were 
conducting 100% identification checks at the base gate. They detected a strong odor of 
alcohol on Applicant’s breath when he drove up to the base gate. He was given field 
sobriety tests. He performed poorly on the tests. Applicant’s blood alcohol content test  
registered 0.17%.  On May 15, 2001, he appeared before the U.S. Magistrate, pled and 
was found guilty of the offenses. On June 12, 2001, he was sentenced to 90 days in jail, 
one year supervised probation and his driving privileges were suspended for one year. 
He was given three years probation for the Operation After Suspension charge. He was 
also sentenced to serve 30 days in jail and ordered to complete an ASAP program. (Tr 
at 40-42; Gov 2 at 11-12; Gov 6; Gov 7 at 3; Gov 8 at 5-7)   
 
On November 12, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI, 3rd 
Offense, a felony and Refusal to provide a Blood/Breath Test. On September 22, 2006, 
he pled guilty to DWI, 3rd Offense, a felony. He was sentenced to five years in the 
penitentiary, with four years, nine months suspended, his driver’s license was 
suspended for 91 years, he was ordered to pay $1,505 in fines and court costs and 
placed on five years supervised probation.  The Refusal to provide a Blood/Breath test 
charge was nolle prossed. (Tr at 43-47; Gov 2 at 12; Gov 7 at 4; Gov 8 at 1-4)  
 
Applicant is on probation until July 2011. He is required to check in with his 
probation officer once a week and is tested for drugs and alcohol on a weekly basis. He 
claims he has no restrictions on his driver’s license even though the court records 
indicate his driver’s license was suspended for 91 years.  He is required to abstain from 
alcohol as part of the terms of his probation. (Tr at 45-47; Gov 2 at 12) 
 
During an October 31, 2008, interview conducted pursuant to his background 
investigation, Applicant admitted that his use of alcohol has had an impact on his ability 
to find a job and his relationships with his friends and family members. He began 
drinking at age 19. He drank on weekends. He occasionally drank alone. He would drink 
approximately a fifth of whiskey over the weekend.  (Gov 2 at 12) 
 
In the late 1990s, Applicant attended a 30-day outpatient alcohol treatment 
program at a military treatment facility.  He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He 
successfully completed the program and was advised to quit drinking alcohol. (Tr at 47-
49; Gov 2 at 12-13)     
 
 
4 
 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all of the allegations and accepts 
responsibility for his past careless behavior.  He suffers from a chronic illness that may 
become terminal.  While on active duty in the Army, he was diagnosed with depression 
and was medically discharged. He believes he used alcohol as a means of self-
medicating.  He is doing his best to show that he is a socially responsible citizen. He 
believes that he will learn from his history of alcohol abuse. He has set and maintained 
a new standard of behavior that does not include alcohol or breaking any laws. He does 
not want depression or alcohol to control him anymore. He is now worthy of holding a 
security clearance. (Answer to SOR, dated August 7, 2009) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that he is fighting for his life and recently 
accepted he is an alcoholic and addict. He looks at alcoholism as a disease that can be 
treated. He attends Alcoholics Anonymous meetings on a regular basis and has a 
different social network in order to remain clean and sober. (Tr at 26-28) 
 
On September 30, 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While 
Under the Influence. He was stopped by the police for having no headlights on. The 
police officer smelled alcohol and administered a field sobriety test which Applicant 
failed. Applicant was taken to jail. When placed in the holding cell, he tried to hang 
himself with a sock. He woke up in the hospital. He initially claimed that he was not 
drinking on the night he was arrested. He later admitted that he drank a glass of wine 
earlier in the day. He admits he was aware that he was required to abstain from alcohol 
as part of his probation. His next court date was November 25, 2009. (Tr at 51-54, 68) 
 
When questioned, Applicant admitted that he had drank alcohol to intoxication on 
at least six occasions after his DWI arrest in 2005. (Tr at 55) 
 
On October 4, 2009, Applicant started to attend AA meetings. He did not 
embrace the concept of AA when he attended AA meetings before. He claims to have 
attended 60 AA meetings since October 4, 2009. He also attends outpatient treatment 
at the Veteran’s Administration (VA) on a daily basis. The VA is providing treatment for 
his depression. He takes an anti-depressant and antabuse. He admits it is difficult for 
him to accept that he has a problem. (Tr at 57-58, 63-65)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are several Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which 
apply to Applicant’s case, CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses) and CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted). Between 
 
6 
 
 
1996 and 2005, Applicant was arrested and convicted for drunk driving offenses on four 
occasions.  Drunk driving is a serious offense. He was charged with a felony offense in 
relation to his fourth arrest for DWI in March 2005.  He had a fifth DWI arrest on 
September 30, 2009 - less than two months after responding to the SOR.   
 
CC DC ¶ 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probation) and CC DC ¶ 31(e) 
(violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-ordered mandated 
rehabilitation program) apply. Applicant is serving probation until July 2011 for his fourth 
DWI conviction.  Part of the condition of his probation is to abstain from alcohol. He 
admits that he drank alcohol on several occasions while on probation. He was arrested 
for his fifth DWI on September 30, 2009. While the charges were pending at the time of 
Applicant’s hearing, his decision to drink alcohol and drive was a violation of his 
probation. 
 
The government produced substantial evidence by way of exhibits and testimony 
to raise CC DC ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15). An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
September 22, 2005.)   
 
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) are relevant to 
Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not 
apply. Applicant was arrested for DWI for the fifth time on September 30, 2009. He 
continued to drink and drive even though he was required to abstain from alcohol as 
part of his probation and his license was suspended for 91 years. He is on probation 
until July 2011. He chose to drink and drive even though he was aware that his past 
alcohol issues raised concerns about his ability to hold a security clearance. While 
Applicant is struggling with his alcohol issues, not enough time has passed to conclude 
Applicant’s past DWI offenses are no longer an issue.  
 
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) does not apply for the reasons mentioned above.  
 
The Criminal Conduct concern is not mitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG & 21:       
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. The following disqualifying conditions are relevant to Applicant’s case: 
 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Condition (AC DC) ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or 
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent) applies. 
Applicant has been arrested and charged with Driving While Under the Influence on five 
occasions. His most recent DWI arrest occurred about a month prior to his security 
clearance hearing while he was on probation for his fourth drunk driving offense.  
 
AC DC &22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the person is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent) applies. Applicant’s history of DWI arrests indicates that Applicant 
drinks to the point of impaired judgment. When he attended treatment for alcohol abuse 
in the late 1990s while in the military, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. The 
credentials of the person providing the diagnosis are unknown. No treatment records 
are included in the record evidence. 
 
AC DC ¶ 22(g) (failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence) applies. The terms of Applicant’s current probation 
require him to abstain from alcohol.  He drank alcohol on several occasions while on 
probation. He admits that he drank to intoxication on six occasions while on probation. 
His failure to follow the terms of his probation resulted in his most recent arrest for DWI 
on September 30, 2009.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. 
 
Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Condition (AC MC) ¶ 23(a) (so much time has 
passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. Applicant’s history 
of alcohol abuse has resulted in five DWI arrests. He continued to drink and drive after 
his fourth DWI conviction. He could not refrain from using alcohol even though he was 
prohibited from drinking alcohol under the terms of his probation. Applicant claims he 
now attends AA meetings and has embraced the program. However, his past history of 
 
8 
 
 
repeated alcohol abuse casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.    
 
 AC MC & 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser) does not apply. While Applicant acknowledges his alcoholism, he has 
done so several times in the past but has been unable to maintain a period of 
abstinence. It is too soon to conclude Applicant has overcome his problems with 
alcohol.  
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under alcohol 
consumption. Guideline G is found against Applicant.  
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
service in the United States Army, his medical condition, and his employment history 
with the defense contractor. Applicant’s history of DWI criminal offenses and his alcohol 
abuse raise serious issues about his ability to protect classified information. He was 
unable to maintain his sobriety while currently serving probation for his fourth DWI even 
though a condition of his probation was that he abstain from alcohol. His recent DWI 
arrest further reinforces that he has not been able to control his alcohol consumption. 
He continues to exercise bad judgment by drinking and driving.  While Applicant claims 
that he now attends AA meetings on a daily basis, it is too soon to conclude that he 
demonstrated a track record of sobriety when considering his past history of alcohol 
abuse.  While Applicant is commended for taking steps to get his alcoholism under 
 
9 
 
 
control, it is too soon to conclude that he mitigated the concerns raised under criminal 
conduct and alcohol consumption. Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct, are found against Applicant.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
       
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
