                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-04955
---------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
January 24, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on March 12, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  On October 23, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on August 10, 2010, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on November 4, 2010.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information
in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on November 4, 2010, and he failed to submit a response to DOHA.  The case
was assigned to the Administrative Judge for resolution on January 6, 2011.  Based
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 34 years old.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an
Operations Analyst Specialist and is applying for a security clearance in connection with
his employment.  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  He used marijuana, with varying frequency,
approximately two to three times a month from August 1998 to at least April 2010.  He
also purchased marijuana, on the order of 2-3 grams or less a month from various
dealers and friends for his own use.  The Applicant indicates that he last used marijuana
in April 2010.  
During an interview with a DoD investigator on April 9, 2010, the Applicant stated
that he intends to continue to use marijuana in the future.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  The
Applicant indicates that his marijuana use in the past has never interfered with his job
responsibilities, nor has he ever been under the influence during work hours.  He
restricts his use of marijuana to a medicinal remedy for ocular migraine headaches,
when he attends a concert, or occasionally when working on an artistic or musical
project.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He smokes marijuana with his band
members and one of them has a license to sell medical marijuana.  (Government
Exhibit 6.)              
The Government argues that the Bond Amendment, set forth under 50 U.S.C.
Section 435(c) disqualifies the Applicant from having a security clearance granted or
renewed by the Department of Defense.  The Bond Amendment provides, in relevant
part, that “After January 1, 2008, the head of a Federal agency may not grant or renew
a security clearance for a covered person who is an unlawful user of a controlled
substance or an addict (As defined in section 802(1) of Title 21.)”  The Bond
Amendment applies to the Applicant because he is an employee of a federal contractor.
Although there is no evidence to prove that the Applicant is an addict, there is ample
evidence to prove that the Applicant was and still is a consistent unlawful user of a
controlled substance, as the record evidence establishes that Applicant smoked
marijuana on a frequent basis over a twelve year period and intends to continue to use
it.     
3
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
25.(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
4
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the
5
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that the Applicant is an unlawful user of marijuana.  He
used marijuana at least two to three times a month from August 1998 to at least April
2010, spanning over a twelve years period.  He also illegally purchased marijuana and
intends to continue to use it in the future.  Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement,
Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of
drug paraphernalia and 25.(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to
clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H,
Drug Involvement.  I also find that the Bond Amendment and the provisions set forth in
50 U.S.C. Section 435c(b),  which states that the drug use in question is not limited to
the use of drugs on a particular day, or within a matter of days or weeks before, but
rather that the unlawful use has occurred recently enough to indicate that the individual
is actively engaged in such conduct are applicable here.  The Applicant is an unlawful
user of marijuana, and is disqualified as a matter of law from security clearance
eligibility pursuant to the Bond Amendment for his illegal use of marijuana.
 
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he clearly does
not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I
find against the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement.)     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
6
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
