                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02993 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 25, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 9, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 7, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objections. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since March 
2009. She was married in 1984 and divorced in 1992. Applicant graduated from college 
in 1993 and earned a bachelor’s degree. She and her current husband have been 
together since 1991 and married in 1998. They have two daughters ages 17 and 12 
years old. They have been separated since July 2009, and she filed for divorce in 
November 2010. The divorce is pending.1  
 
 Applicant worked outside the home for one year after she graduated from 
college. From 1994 to March 2009, she did not work outside the home. Her husband 
had his own business, and she would help him and work about 15-30 hours a week. 
She was not paid. In 2002, he incorporated his business, and he was the sole owner 
and proprietor. She stated that her husband decided what bills to pay and what bills not 
to pay. In 2005, he opened a showroom for his business, and Applicant was working 
about 60 to 80 hours a week but was not compensated. He handled the business 
accounts, which she did not have access to. They also had personal joint accounts.2  
 
 Applicant incurred student loans when she attended college. They total 
approximately $40,023. She stated that she made occasional payments through the 
years, but they were not consistent and the loans have been delinquent for 17 years. 
She stated she would occasionally mention to her husband the need to repay the loans, 
but his response was they would pay them when they had the money. Applicant was 
aware she still owed them, but acquiesced to her husband to “keep from rocking the 
boat.”3 She explained that she is aware that if she makes nine consecutive payments 
the loans will be removed from a delinquent status.4  
 
 In addition to the delinquent student loans, Applicant has three judgments that 
are owed. Two are to a hospital and the remaining one is to a surveyor. The judgments 
total $5,706. The two medical debts were for treatment for her husband. These are joint 
debts and the amounts were for services not covered by insurance. The surveyor 
judgment is in Applicant’s name only. The judgments are from 2005, 2007, and 2009.5 
1 Tr. 31-35. 
 
2 Tr. 20, 28, 44-48. 
 
3 Tr. 28. 
 
4 Tr. 24-25, 29, 48-49, 62-63. 
 
5 Tr. 22-23, 49-50. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant stated that, because she was not working and did not receive pay for 
the work she did for her husband’s business, she did not have the money to pay these 
debts. She agreed to stay home with the children and not work outside the home. When 
she and her husband separated, she began to take control of her finances once she got 
a job. She paid some smaller debts listed in her credit bureau report. She sold some 
property that she inherited from her father, to pay some debts. She took money from her 
savings to pay other debts. Applicant’s divorce and property settlement is pending. She 
stated she chose not to make payments on the debts in the SOR because she believes 
they will be off-set in the property settlement negotiations and the final divorce decree.6  
 
 Applicant and her husband own a piece of land that she pays $500 a month on 
the mortgage. They are trying to sell it. Once it is sold, she anticipates being able to pay 
her delinquent debts.7  
 
 Applicant has custody of the children. She receives child support, but it is not 
court-ordered and she does not receive it consistently. She may receive $300 one 
month, and $900 another month. She cannot anticipate what the amount will be.8  
 
 Applicant has no other property. The family house was foreclosed in 2007. She 
and her daughters lived in a trailer for a period of time. They also lived in a leased 
house for a period of time. Applicant owes the landlord of the leased house about 
$5,000 that she considers a personal loan. The landlord accepted her promise to repay 
the debt. She anticipated including this debt in the property settlement. She expects to 
be able to pay all of her delinquent debts except her student loans when the property 
settlement is completed.9  
 
 Applicant updated her personal financial statement, which now reflects that she 
spends more than she earns. She stated she used her savings to pay bills and has 
none left. She is waiting for the joint property to be sold so she can pay her remaining 
delinquent debts. Her ability to meet her expenses is often dependent on how much 
money her husband gives her for child support. She stated she has a budget, but has 
not received financial counseling. She attributes her financial problems to acquiescing 
to her husband’s wishes that she stay home to care for their children.10  
 
 I have considered all of the documents Applicant provided. She provided letters 
and articles showing her volunteer efforts in her community.11 She also provided 
6 Tr. 21-24. 
 
7 Tr. 27, 40-43. 
 
8 Tr. 34-36. 
 
9 Tr. 26-27, 38-40. 
 
10 Tr. 54-61. 
 
11 AE B. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
character letters describing her as a wonderful mother who is a strong honest woman. 
She is considered loyal, and trustworthy. The letters also reflected her attributes in 
customer service. She is described as being the consummate professional, who is 
smart and intelligent.12 I have also considered Applicant’s performance appraisal which 
reflected that she met or exceeded the expectations of her employer.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
12 AE C. 
 
13 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has approximately $47,729 in delinquent debts that are unpaid or 
unresolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has three judgments and two delinquent student loan debts. Her 
student loan debts have been delinquent for approximately 17 years. None of the 
judgments or student loan debts have been paid or resolved. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are still owed and she has not 
taken action to resolve them.  
 
 Applicant worked with her husband, but did not receive a salary. She attributed 
her financial problems to her husband wanting her to stay home and care for their 
children, and his decisions about which bills to pay. I cannot find that under the 
circumstances these conditions were beyond Applicant’s control. She did not provide 
sufficient evidence to convince me that she was forced to ignore her debts. She did not 
provide evidence about what she has done to pay her debts since she separated from 
her husband, or that she has contacted the creditors and worked out payment plans. 
She has not paid any of the debts on the SOR. At this point, she does not want to 
address her debts because she believes it may jeopardize a property settlement. 
Although Applicant may have found herself in a difficult situation when addressing 
finances with her husband, she has not taken any action to address her debts. She 
admitted her student loans have been delinquent for 17 years. Even if these conditions 
were beyond her control, I cannot find she acted responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not 
apply.  
 
 The judgments and debts alleged in the SOR remain unpaid and unresolved. 
Applicant’s updated financial statement shows her expenses are greater than her 
income. She has not made good-faith payments to creditors or contacted her creditors 
to resolve her debts. She is waiting for her divorce and property settlement to be 
completed before addressing her delinquent accounts. At this juncture, I cannot find 
there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or under control. Applicant is 
hopeful that the sale of property and the property settlement will put her in a better 
financial situation. However, Applicant’s quasi-plan on how she intends to resolve her 
debts is too speculative. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
done well at her job. She is considered a loyal and trustworthy friend. She stayed at 
home with her children and did not earn an income during the time she was with her 
husband. She owes $46,729 for judgments and delinquent debts. They are unpaid and 
unresolved. At this time, she does not have a plan to resolve her debts, other than 
waiting for her divorce and property settlement to be completed. Her expenses exceed 
her income. Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
