                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01875 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 22, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 14, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 8, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on November 12, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 9, 2010. Applicant affirmed she received the Notice of Hearing 
within the 15-day requirement. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The Government also offered a 
demonstrative exhibit that was marked as Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant and one witness 
testified on her behalf. She offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted 
without objections. The record was held open until December 30, 2010, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. She did not submit any documents and the 
record closed. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and 1.h through 
1.n. She denied the remaining allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old single mother. Her daughter is 13 years old and has 
lived with Applicant’s grandmother since 1997. She receives child support for her 
daughter, but it is paid directly to her grandmother who is the caregiver. Applicant also 
provides approximately $100-$200 a month in support for her child.  
 
Applicant is a high school graduate. She began work with her present employer 
in May 2008, and remained employed until January 2009. She was unemployed from 
January 2009 until she was rehired by the same employer in December 2009. Her 
current hourly rate with her present employer is $17.88. She works 40 hours a week. 
From September 2007 until May 2008, Applicant worked for a private company for 40 
hours a week and earned an hourly rate of $6.25. From July 2007 to September 2007, 
she was unemployed. From August 2005 to July 2007, she worked as a welder and 
earned $10.75 an hour. Applicant had periods of unemployment prior to 2005.1  
 
 Applicant incurred medical bills when she did not have health insurance. The bills 
incurred were for both her and her daughter. The medical bills were for acute care and 
not long-term medical problems. She estimated some of the bills are about six to seven 
years old. Applicant was also in a car accident in 2007. The other driver’s insurance 
carrier did not cover her injuries. The insurance carrier told her the reason she was not 
covered was because they did not believe it was their responsibility.2  
 
 In 2008, Applicant contacted a debt consolidation company to help her set up a 
budget to identify where she was spending her money. She did not adhere to the 
budget and did not enlist the services of the consolidation company.3  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are medical bills to the same creditor (balances 
of $21and $223).4 In her answer to the SOR dated April 14, 2010, Applicant stated she 
1 Tr. 28-39, 41, 43-44. 
 
2 Tr. 39-40, 44-48. 
 
3 Tr. 48. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
contacted the creditor and she agreed to pay $20 a month beginning in May 2010, until 
the debt was paid in full. She has not made any payments. The debts remain unpaid 
and unresolved.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c (balance $1,807, same debt as SOR ¶ 1.g) is for an 
overdrawn bank checking account due to insufficient funds. Applicant provided a 
document showing that she paid $251 on April 20, 2010. In her answer to the SOR, she 
stated she made arrangements to pay $300 on the 16th of the month for four months. 
She did not make the promised payments. She stated she contacted the creditor who 
agreed to settle the debt for $780, provided she paid $390 on December 30, 2010, and 
the same amount on January 3, 2011. Applicant did not provide any documented proof 
of the settlement offer or any other payments she made toward the debt. The debt is 
unpaid and unresolved.6  
 
 Applicant stated in her answer that she contacted the creditor for the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.d ($84) and she agreed to pay the balance in full. She did not pay the debt in April 
2010, as she promised. She stated at her hearing she attempted to pay the debt in 
October 2010, with a debit card, but the payment did not go through. She admitted it 
was likely due to not having sufficient funds loaded on the debit card. The debt remains 
unpaid and unresolved.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($9,296) is for a repossessed vehicle. Applicant returned 
the vehicle voluntarily. She stated after purchasing the used car in 2003, it developed 
mechanical problems, and it was too expensive to repair. She stated the creditor initially 
agreed to pay for half the repairs, then refused to do so. In her answer, she stated that 
she contacted the creditor and they both agreed she would pay $100 a month that 
would be withdrawn from her checking account. She did not make any payments as 
promised. She provided a document dated December 8, 2010, with a settlement offer of 
$6,031, provided she makes monthly payments of $100 until the amount is satisfied. 
The first payment is due January 3, 2011. The debt is unpaid.8  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.p, and 1.q are to the same creditor ($365, $1,722, 
and $163). They are medical debts. Applicant stated she contacted the creditor in April 
2010, and was advised it did not have a record of her debts. She then stated that she 
contacted the creditor again on December 8, 2010, and it now has a record of the debts. 
It agreed to consolidate the debts, and she will begin making payments in January 
 
4 GE 2 at 1. 
 
5 Tr. 21, 49-50. 
 
6 Tr. 22-26, 50-52, 60-62; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. 52-54. 
 
8 Tr. 26-27, 55-57; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
2011. She stated the creditor was going to send her a written offer,  and she is waiting 
to receive it. The debts remain unpaid.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h is a medical bill ($95). In her answer, Applicant stated she 
contacted the creditor in June or July 2010, and made payment arrangements. At her 
hearing she confirmed that she could not make the payments on the plan and tried to 
contact the creditor again, but was unsuccessful. The debt is unpaid and unresolved.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($1,938) is a medical debt. Applicant stated that in April 
2010, she contacted the creditor, and it agreed that her payment could be made by mail 
or an office visit. She did not make a payment at that time. She stated she went back to 
the facility months later, and she was told by the creditor that it would mail her an 
invoice. Apparently it did not have Applicant’s new address because she had moved. 
She has not yet received the invoice. Applicant has not paid the debt.11 
 
 The debts in SOR 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n are medical debts ($346, $36, $59, 
$369, and $231) from the same creditor. Applicant stated in her answer that she 
contacted the creditors and made arrangements to pay the debts. She stated that she 
was told by the creditors that she would have to pay by debit card or money order, and 
that they wanted her to begin her payments right away. Applicant did not make any 
payments. She stated she contacted the creditors again on December 8, 2010, and was 
advised by the creditor that it would send her something in the mail. The debts are 
unpaid and unresolved.12 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($90) is for telephone services. Applicant stated she 
contacted the creditor and was told it has no record that she owes the debt. The debt is 
listed on her credit report. She has not disputed the debt with the credit bureau (CB).13  
  
 Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.r, 1.s, 1.t, 1.u, and 1.v ($110, $1,050, 
$286, $108, $1,111). She stated she contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.r and it did not 
have a record that she owes the debt. Regarding the other debts, she stated she did not 
contact the collection companies that now likely own the debts. She stated she could 
not locate the creditor of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.s and 1.t. The debts are listed on 
9 Tr. 57-60. 
 
10 Tr. 62-63. 
 
11 Tr. 63-68. 
 
12 Tr. 68-72. 
 
13 Tr. 72-75. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s credit reports.14 She did not dispute the debts with the CB. The debts are 
unresolved and unpaid.15  
 
 Applicant’s net monthly pay is $2,436 and her monthly expenses are 
approximately $1,418. She estimated that she has about $200 to $300 remaining at the 
end of the month after paying her bills. She does not know how she spends the 
remaining money. She does not have a checking, savings, or retirement account. She 
keeps whatever money she has in cash. She does not have a budget.16  
 
 Applicant’s mother testified on her behalf. She stated Applicant is a hard worker 
and her ability to maintain a steady job has given her stability. Applicant has had 
transportation problems because jobs that are available to her required her to have 
reliable transportation. Some of the jobs she has held did not have health insurance. 
She believes her daughter is motivated.17  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
14 GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
15 Tr. 73. 
 
16 Tr. 75-86. 
 
17 Tr. 86-95. 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has 22 delinquent debts totaling approximately $21,041, that are 
unpaid or unresolved. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has 22 delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. She has 
contacted some creditors and made promises to pay the debts, but has not fulfilled her 
promises. I find that AG ¶ 20(a) is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts 
are numerous, ongoing, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur.  
 
 Applicant is a single mother and her child lives with Applicant’s grandmother. Her 
child receives child support from her father and Applicant also provides financial support 
for her child. Applicant has experienced periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, which were beyond her control. For AG ¶ 20(b) to be fully applicable, 
Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant stated that 
she made payment agreements with creditors, but admitted she has not followed 
through with the payments. Her personal financial statement showed she had excess 
income after paying her expenses, but she did not use it to repay her debts. She stated 
she contacted a debt consolidation company, and they helped her prepare a budget, but 
she did not follow it or consolidate her debts. Applicant stated she had a settlement 
agreement with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c. She was to pay $300 a month for four 
months. She provided proof of one payment of $251, which was not in compliance with 
the original agreement. She stated she had a new settlement agreement, but did not 
provide documentation to substantiate her claim. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies 
 
8 
 
 
because Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. Although she 
was assisted in preparing a budget, Applicant has not received financial counseling. 
She has not provided proof that she is making consistent good-faith payments on any of 
the 22 delinquent debts. I find that there are no clear indications the problem is being 
resolved and is under control. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
Applicant has not disputed or provided documentation to support her dispute for those 
debts that she denied. She admitted that, regarding some of her delinquent debts, she 
did not contact the collection companies that likely held her accounts. I find AG ¶ 21 (e) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
experienced periods of unemployment and underemployment. She is a single mother 
supporting her daughter. In April 2010, after receiving the SOR, Applicant promised to 
make payments on her debts and pay them in full. She has not fulfilled those promises. 
She denied other debts that were alleged, but took no action to dispute or otherwise 
resolve them. She has 22 delinquent debts totaling approximately $21,041 that are 
unpaid or unresolved. Applicant did not provide a plan to pay or resolve her debts. 
Applicant failed to meet her burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.v:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
