 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01787 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen Glassman, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 30, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for June 30, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s exhibit list, 
administrative notice request, and discovery letter were appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 through 3. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant’s list of exhibits and witnesses, 
administrative notice request, and an article written by another attorney were appended 
to the record as HEs A through C. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through E, which were admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
At Applicant’s request and without objection, the record was left open until July 
14, 2017, for additional documentation. Applicant submitted documentation that was 
marked as AE F and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 11, 2017. Department Counsel and Applicant requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Israel. The facts administratively noticed are 
summarized in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is a 39-year-old analyst 
employed by a defense contractor since March 2015. He worked for a prior defense 
contractor, at a U.S. Embassy overseas, from January 2008 to February 2009. He 
worked for another defense contractor from August 2010 to November 2012. He was 
granted eligibility for a public trust position by another federal agency in 2008. He was 
granted a DOD security clearance in 2014.1  
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen and resident. He obtained a high-school 
diploma in the United States in 1996 and a bachelor’s degree from a U.S. university in 
2001. He was previously married from September 2009 to November 2010. As of the 
hearing, he was engaged to a native-born U.S. citizen. He does not have any children.2 
 
Applicant enlisted and served as an active duty infantryman in the Israeli military 
from November 2004 to February 2006. Upon completion of his service, he declined an 
offer to serve in the Israeli military reserves and was honorably discharged. His primary 
motivation for serving in the Israeli military was to develop the skills and experience that 
would assist him in furthering a career in security in support of the U.S. Government. He 
initially desired to serve in the U.S. military, but learned when he spoke to recruiters that 
he was ineligible due to a longstanding medical condition. He explored alternative 
options to serve the U.S. Government through security positions with defense 
contractors and in the private sector, but discovered that all such positions required 
prior military experience. He did not inquire whether his medical condition would have 
disqualified him from holding these positions since he did not meet the requisite criteria 
of prior military service. He did not explore options that did not require prior military 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 24-25, 70-77; GEs 1-3; AE B.  
 
2 Tr. at 55-125; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
experience because such positions would not have provided him with the opportunity to 
develop skills in his desired field.3   
 
Applicant discovered through internet research a program designed for overseas 
Jewish volunteers who had an interest in serving in the Israeli military, so long as one 
provided evidence of Jewish heritage. He decided then, at the age of 23, that it was a 
reasonable option for him to serve in the Israeli military given that the United States and 
Israel were allies with mutual adversaries. He made this decision on his own. He 
discussed his decision with his parents, and their conversations revolved primarily 
around their concern for Applicant’s safety.4 
 
In 2004, Applicant traveled to Israel to join the Israeli military. Acting on the 
recommendation that he have a basic proficiency of Hebrew prior to enlistment, 
Applicant first engaged in a five-month language instruction program. The language 
program was not affiliated with the Israeli military. He subsequently enlisted and the 
Israeli military sent him to additional language training.5  
 
During the enlistment process, Applicant lied and told the Israeli military that he 
did not have the medical condition that rendered him ineligible to serve in the U.S. 
military. He did so because he was told, at an initial enlistment meeting when he arrived 
in Israel, that his longstanding medical condition, combined with another of his medical 
conditions, would have lowered his physical profile to such a degree that would have 
disqualified him from serving as an infantryman. He was previously unaware of this 
information. He understood from his internet research prior to traveling to Israel that he 
would be permitted to serve in some capacity despite his medical condition. He also 
understood that his medical condition was not necessarily a disqualifier for joining the 
infantry.6  
 
Applicant determined that while he was unwilling to lie to the U.S. military and 
government about this particular medical condition, it was acceptable for him to lie to 
the Israeli military and government since he did not have any allegiance to them. He 
was not concerned his medical condition would be discovered because he managed it 
and was able to maintain a high level of fitness. He disclosed his other medical 
condition and medical history to the Israeli military. In the 13 years that have passed 
since his enlistment in the Israeli military, Applicant has matured. He understands now 
that he should have disclosed his longstanding medical condition to the Israeli military, 
even if such a disclosure would have prevented him from serving as an infantryman.7   
   
                                                          
3 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 1-3; AEs A, C. 
 
4 Tr. at 55-125; GE 3.  
 
5 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 2-3. 
 
6 Tr. at 55-125; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 55-125; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s ex-girlfriend resides in Israel. He met her on an online dating site 
when he attended the five-month language instruction program in Israel. He lived with 
her while he was serving in the Israeli military. He last communicated with her in 2007. 
When Applicant moved back to the United States from Israel in 2007, he had social 
media contact with her. He also had social media contact with her one sister who also 
resides in Israel, and several individuals in Israel with whom Applicant served in the 
Israeli military, to include his unit supervisor. After he received the SOR, Applicant 
deleted all of his foreign contacts on social media. He had not previously deleted them 
because he consulted and was advised by a former colleague that doing so at once 
might trigger to any one of his foreign contacts who might be working in the intelligence 
field that he was pursuing a sensitive position. He ultimately decided that since he was 
not in communication with any of his foreign contacts, he did not need to maintain a 
social media connection with them. Since he deleted his foreign contacts on social 
media, some have tried to reconnect with him but Applicant has not responded and has 
no intentions of doing so.8 
  
 Applicant maintains contact with one individual, a U.S. citizen and resident, with 
whom Applicant served in the Israeli military. This individual is the founder and CEO of 
a civilian national service organization that has no connections to the Israeli government 
or military. As an American Jew, this individual chose to serve in the Israeli military and 
did so for two years in the same unit as Applicant. He attested that both he and 
Applicant were low-level infantrymen. Since their discharge from the Israeli military, 
Applicant and this individual see each other once yearly and communicate 
approximately twice yearly.9 
 
 After graduating from college and before he served in the Israeli military, 
Applicant took a trip to Israel in August 2002 through a birthright program. The program 
helped teach him about his Jewish culture. Subsequent to his Israeli military service and 
during a period of unemployment, he traveled to Israel in June 2010 through the same 
birthright program. On this occasion, he served as a volunteer male counselor to the 
program. He did not see any of his former Israeli military contacts or his ex-girlfriend 
during this trip. Both trips were comprised of U.S. citizens, all Jewish Americans, who 
wanted to travel to Israel to learn more about their Jewish culture. He has not since 
traveled to Israel. Should he travel to Israel or any foreign country in the future, he 
understands as a security clearance holder the requirement to report such foreign 
travel.10 
 
 Applicant did not have an Israeli security clearance when he served in the Israeli 
military. He has never been an Israeli citizen, as he was not required to become one in 
order to serve in the Israeli military, and as such he has never held an Israeli passport. 
He chose not to become an Israeli citizen or obtain an Israeli passport because he did 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 1-3. 
 
9 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 1-3; AE F. 
 
10 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 1-3. 
 
 
5 
 
not want to leave any room for misinterpretation as to where his loyalties lie. He has 
never voted in an Israeli election. He earned $6,000 yearly when he served in the Israeli 
military. He was required to open a bank account in Israel for the direct deposit of that 
income. He rented two apartments in Israel as he was required to maintain a home of 
record during the course of his Israeli military service. Since his discharge from the 
Israeli military and move back to the United States, he has not received nor does he 
expect to receive any income or benefits from the Israeli government or military. He also 
closed his Israeli bank account.11  
 
 Upon his discharge from the Israeli military, Applicant moved back to and has 
since lived in the United States. He resided with his parents from March 2006 through 
January 2008. He moved out of his parents’ home and rented at various locations from 
January 2008 until 2015. Since 2015, he and his fiancée have rented a place together.  
He was briefly unemployed from February to May 2006, and again from November 2012 
to July 2013. He has otherwise worked as a self-employed security consultant or a 
defense contractor as previously discussed. Applicant and his fiancée have 
approximately $25,000 in joint savings. Applicant also has approximately $50,000 in 
retirement assets in the United States. He does not have any assets in Israel.12 
 
 Applicant testified that his prior Israeli military service cannot be used against 
him, as his family, friends, and coworkers are aware of it. His parents, sibling, and 
fiancée are native-born U.S. citizens and residents. His father worked for many years 
for a defense contractor. His fiancée, who works for the U.S. Government and holds a 
DOD security clearance, testified that Applicant disclosed his Israeli military service to 
her when they met in May 2014. She described Applicant as passionate about the 
United States. Applicant’s supervisor also testified that he was aware of Applicant’s 
prior Israeli military service and described Applicant as an exceptional performer, with 
no reason to question his character, integrity, or loyalty to the United States. Applicant 
also provided letters of support from his neighbor and mentor, both of whom were also 
aware of Applicant’s Israeli military service and who described Applicant as trustworthy 
and loyal to the United States.13    
 
Israel 
 
 Defense, diplomatic, and economic cooperation between the United States and 
Israel has been close for decades. Strong bilateral relations have fueled and reinforced 
significant cooperation between the United States and Israel on defense-related 
matters. Aid for Israel has been designed to maintain Israel’s qualitative military edge 
over neighboring militaries, since Israel must rely on better equipment and training to 
compensate for a manpower deficit in any potential regional conflict. However, U.S. aid 
to Israel is not unlimited. Sales of U.S. defense articles and services to Israel are 
subject to the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) and the July 23, 1952, Mutual Defense 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 55-125; GEs 1-3; AE F. 
 
12 Tr. at 55-125; GE 1. 
 
13 Tr. at 55-125; AEs D-E. 
 
6 
 
Assistance Agreement between the United States and Israel. AECA enumerates the 
purposes for which foreign governments can use U.S. military articles and limits the 
ability of foreign governments to transfer U.S. military products to third party countries 
without the prior consent of the President of the United States. The 1952 agreement 
states that the government of Israel assures the United States government that 
equipment, materials, or services acquired from the United States are required for and 
will be used solely to maintain Israel’s internal security and Israel’s legitimate self-
defense.  
 
 Although the United States has provided regular military support to Israel, there 
is a significant documented history of classified information and controlled technologies 
being illegally imported to Israel. These include parts used in fighter jets, spy software, 
components for certain missiles and fighter jet aircraft, digital oscilloscopes that are 
capable of being utilized in the development of weapons of mass destruction and in 
missile delivery fields, a product containing a certain chemical precursor that is 
controlled for chemical, biological, antiterrorism, and chemical reasons, pressure 
transducers that are controlled for nuclear non-proliferation reasons, encryption 
software that is controlled for national security reasons, and classified documents. 
Illegal technology transfers, even to private Israeli entities, are a significant concern 
because foreign government entities have learned to capitalize on private-sector 
technology acquisitions.  
 
 In the past 30 years, there have been at least three cases in which employees 
of the U.S. Government were convicted of disclosing classified information to Israel or 
of conspiracy to act as an Israeli agent. Reports indicate that concerns regarding 
possible Israeli espionage persist among U.S. officials. The most prominent espionage 
case is that of Jonathan Pollard. He pled guilty in 1986, with his then wife, to selling 
classified documents to Israel. Israel granted Pollard, who is serving a life sentence in 
a U.S. federal prison, citizenship in 1996 and, in 1998, acknowledged that Pollard had 
been its agent. 
 
 A travel warning issued by the U.S. Department of State for Israel, the West 
Bank, and Gaza remains in effect, as the security environment remains complex due to 
heightened tensions and security risks. U.S. citizens are advised that all persons 
entering or departing Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to security screening, 
and may be denied entry or exit. Israeli security officials have on occasion requested 
access to travelers’ personal email accounts or other social media accounts as a 
condition of entry. In such circumstances, travelers should have no expectation of 
privacy for any data stored on such devices or in their accounts. 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
7 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
8 
 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant has not communicated with his ex-girlfriend in Israel since 2007. When 
Applicant moved back to the United States from Israel in 2007, he had limited social 
media contact with her, her one sister, and several other individuals in Israel with whom 
he served in the Israeli military. He deleted all of his social media foreign contacts after 
he received the SOR. He has not responded and has no intentions of responding to any 
attempts by these foreign contacts to reconnect on social media. While Applicant 
maintains contact with one individual with whom he served in the Israeli military, this 
individual is a U.S. citizen and resident with no ties to the Israeli government or military.       
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are not established. 
 
 
 
9 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9:     
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign 
country over the United States, then he or she may provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States. Foreign 
involvement raises concerns about an individual's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness when it is in conflict with U.S. national interests or when the 
individual acts to conceal it. By itself; the fact that a U.S. citizen is also a citizen 
of another country is not disqualifying without an objective showing of such 
conflict or attempt at concealment. The same is true for a U.S. citizen's exercise 
of any right or privilege of foreign citizenship and any action to acquire or obtain 
recognition of a foreign citizenship. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) participation in foreign activities, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) assuming or attempting to assume any type of employment, position, or  
political office in a foreign government or military organization. 
 
Applicant’s service in the Israeli military from November 2004 to February 2006 
raises AG ¶ 10(d).   
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided  
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(f) the foreign preference, if detected, involves a foreign country, entity, or 
association that poses a low national security risk; and 
 
(g) civil employment or military service was authorized under U.S. law, or  
the employment or service was otherwise consented to as required by U.S. law. 
 
 As a 23 year old, Applicant decided that serving in the Israeli military would 
enable him to further his desired career in security in support of the U.S. Government. 
Since his longstanding medical condition, which he determined he did not have to 
disclose to the Israeli military, rendered him ineligible to serve in the U.S. military, he 
viewed his decision as a reasonable option. That the United States and Israel were 
allies with mutual adversaries also factored into his decision. He has matured since 
then. He acknowledged he should have disclosed his medical condition to the Israeli 
military. His Israeli military service occurred between 11 and 13 years ago. He no longer 
has any ties to the Israeli government or military. He has never been an Israeli citizen, 
he has never held an Israeli passport, and he has never held an Israeli security 
clearance. AG ¶¶ 11(f) and 11(g) are applicable. 
  
 
10 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under both 
guidelines, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference 
security concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
