KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board cannot receive or consider any new evidence on appeal. Applicant has not
made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-04740.a1
DATE: 09/22/2017
DATE: September 22, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04740
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August  7, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On July 7, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement in which Applicant states that her financial status has
improved due to a recent promotion and the steady growth of her husband’s business. Additionally,
she has completed credit counseling and is in the process of starting a debt repayment plan.  She
notes that with the exception of financial difficulties, she is a model citizen and employee.
The Board cannot receive or consider any new evidence on appeal. See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Additionally, the Board does not review a case de novo. The Board’s authority to review a case is
limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                    
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
