KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from her
foreign contacts, misconduct, and false statements. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-05994.a1
DATE: 09/14/2017
DATE: September 14, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05994
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
21, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 15, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline B are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born in Iraq, earning an undergraduate degree from a university located there. 
She later acquired a graduate degree from a U.S. university. Applicant has certain contacts within
Iraq, including a military officer.  A report by the U.S. military stated that she improperly hosted and
attended parties with foreign persons.  In addition, Applicant worked on a telecommunications
project which involved meeting with Iraqis.  
In 1990, Applicant pled guilty to bribing a public official and was sentenced to 18 months
in jail, along with other penalties.  Several years later, she pled guilty to theft by deception and was
ordered to pay restitution.  This latter incident involved a friend of her daughter, who used
Applicant’s credit card in a fraudulent manner.  Although Applicant testified that she was not aware
of this misuse of her card, the daughter’s friend told police that Applicant was aware of the
transactions.
In 2009, Applicant was terminated from employment due to unofficial communications with
the Iraqi military, including high-ranking officers, and receipt of unauthorized gifts, including a
vehicle.  An incident report by the military also stated that Applicant traveled to another country
with large sums of money and that she engaged in improper use of her cell phone.  Applicant
claimed that she did not operate a vehicle on base in violation of military policy, and she submitted
a letter by an Iraqi official that he had loaned her his car rather than presenting it to her as a gift. 
However, the military report stated that Applicant had admitted that the car had been a gift.  
In her 2015 security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not disclose her job
termination.  She also denied that she provided false information about the credit card incident
during an interview with officials from the military.  Applicant submitted various certificates of
achievement.  Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for job performance and loyalty.
The Judge’s Analysis
Although the Judge entered favorable findings under Guideline B, those allegations were
included under Guideline E as Personal Conduct concerns.  In addressing Applicant’s case for
mitigation, the Judge noted evidence of various false statements.  She  concluded that Applicant’s
testimony that she had not known about the credit card fraud was lacking credibility.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from her foreign contacts,
misconduct, and false statements.  The Judge stated that Applicant had not provided sufficient
evidence of rehabilitation to warrant a favorable decision.
Discussion
Applicant challenges a statement in the Judge’s analysis.  The Judge noted Applicant’s
evidence that an Iraqi official loaned her a car rather than making it a gift.  The Judge stated that this
evidence was contradicted by a statement in the military report to the effect that the car was, in fact,
a gift.  Applicant denied that there was contradictory evidence in the record.  However, we conclude
that the Judge’s statement is supportable, in that the record includes a document that contradicts
Applicant’s claims at the hearing.1  Applicant cites to favorable evidence, such as her character
evidence.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence
in the record.  Neither has she shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00502 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 7,
2017).  We have given due consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited in her
brief.  However, Hearing Office cases are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the
Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01416 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2017).    
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
1Government Exhibit 7, Summary of Information, dated August 6, 2010, at 3: “[Applicant] received gifts
from [military members], to include a sport utility vehicle which she operated on [base].”  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
