 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02785 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Between December 2010 and November 2015, Applicant was arrested three 
times (burglary/theft, marijuana use and possession, and driving while intoxicated 
(DWI)) and convicted once for DWI. It has been almost two years since his last offense 
(DWI). The passage of time without additional incidents of security concern, his 
performance at work and school, and his positive community involvement, are sufficient 
to establish his successful rehabilitation. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 17, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) on April 16, 2016, issued him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct). Applicant 
answered the SOR on May 3, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on February 3, 2017. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on February 9, 2016, scheduling a hearing for March 1, 2017. At the hearing, 
the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant testified, presented the 
 
2 
 
 
testimony of one witness, and submitted exhibit (AE) A (comprised of five reference 
statements). All exhibits were admitted without objection, except for GE 5, which was 
made part of the record, but not as evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on March 9, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c. His admissions to 
the SOR and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the record evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is a 2010 high 
school graduate, and received an associate’s degree in information technology in 2013. 
In December 2013, his current employer, a federal contractor and clearance sponsor, 
hired him as a desktop support technician. This is his first security clearance 
application. Applicant has never been married and has no children. 
 
In response to Section 22 (Police Record) of his 2014 SCA, Applicant disclosed 
that in December 2010, he was arrested and charged with possession of burglary tools-
motor vehicle; conspiracy to possess burglary tools-motor vehicle; burglary-4th 
degree/tools; and theft of less than $1,000 value. He entered into a probation before 
judgment plea agreement and was given six months’ probation. After completion of the 
probation terms, the charges were nolle prosequi. The charges were later expunged. 
 
During an April 2014 interview with a government investigator and at his hearing, 
Applicant claimed he was an innocent bystander in the above offenses. He averred he 
was invited by a close friend and his cousins to go for a car ride. He was not aware of 
his friends’ plans to break into cars. They stopped at a neighborhood, left him in the car, 
and they went on a spree of breaking into cars until they were arrested. Applicant 
claimed he had not associated with any of his friends involved in this incident since 
December 2010. At hearing, Applicant testified he still associates with his close friend, 
who is now a law-abiding citizen. His friend completed a master’s degree, is working as 
a financial analyst, and is about to get married.  
 
In March 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of 
marihuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. Following a pretrial diversion plea 
agreement, the charges were placed on a STET docket. After Applicant completed 20 
hours of community service, the charges were nolle prosequi.  
 
In response to Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity), Applicant 
disclosed that he illegally used marihuana twice in his life “because he was around the 
wrong kind of people.” He stated in the 2014 SCA that he last used marijuana in March 
2013, the day he was arrested. He also stated he does not intend to use marijuana ever 
again because he wants to succeed in the U.S. Government.  
 
 
3 
 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified he illegally used marijuana for the first time in 
2011, at age 19. He was in his neighborhood and someone offered marijuana to him, 
and he smoked it. The second time he used marijuana was a year later, in 2012. He 
was at a park about 15 minutes from his home and “another guy” peer-pressured him 
into smoking marijuana. Applicant claimed he has not used marijuana again since 2012.  
 
In March 2013, Applicant was sitting in his car, waiting for a friend who had been 
riding with him and had just left the car, when a police officer pulled over and told 
Applicant he knew he had something in his car. Applicant looked in between the car 
seats, saw the marijuana “dime-bag” (a circle of about one inch in circumference) and 
handled the marijuana over to the police officer. Applicant claimed that the marijuana he 
handed over to the police officer belonged to his friend and that he did not know about it 
before the police approached him.   
 
In November 2015, Applicant was charged with driving while impaired by alcohol 
(DWI). In January 2016, he was convicted of the offense and sentenced to one year of 
supervised probation and to pay a $200 fine and court costs.  
 
Applicant claimed he has learned his lesson the hard way. He is now trying to do 
his best to stay out of trouble and away from associates who are bad influences. He is 
focusing on school, his work, and helping his father to support his family. Additionally, 
Applicant volunteers at a local food pantry and as a teacher’s aid. 
 
Applicant’s references included two co-workers, a friend, his sister, and father. 
Applicant was described as a hard-working, dependable, and reliable employee who is 
kind-hearted and dedicated to his family. His father believes Applicant was humiliated 
and remorseful because of the distress his DWI conviction placed on his family. 
Applicant promised never to repeat his foolish misconduct again. His father believes he 
will not engage in criminal activity in the future. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
While the case was pending a decision, the Security Executive Agent 
implemented Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. I decided this case under the AGs 
implemented by SEAD 4. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
 
4 
 
 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
In December 2010, Applicant was charged with possession of burglary tools-
motor vehicle; conspiracy to possess burglary tools-motor vehicle; burglary-4th 
degree/tools; and theft of less than $1,000 value (among other offenses). He entered 
into a probation before judgment plea agreement and was given six months’ probation. 
 
5 
 
 
After completion of the probation terms, the charges were nolle prosequi. The court later 
expunged the charges at Applicant’s request. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana in 2011, at age 19, and in 2012. He claimed he 
has not used marijuana since 2012. He does not intend to use marijuana ever again 
because he wants to succeed in his job with a federal contractor. In March 2013, 
Applicant was charged with possession of marihuana and possession of paraphernalia. 
Applicant claimed the marijuana belonged to a friend. Following a pretrial diversion plea 
agreement, the charges were placed on a STET docket. After Applicant completed 20 
hours of community service, the charges were nolle prosequi.  
 
 In November 2015, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while 
impaired by alcohol (DWI). In January 2016, he was convicted of the offense and 
sentenced to one year of supervised probation and to pay a $200 fine and court costs. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) apply and mitigate the criminal misconduct security concerns. 
Applicant’s five incidents of criminal behavior occurred between December 2010 and 
November 2015. It has been almost two years since his last offense. Applicant served 
his sentence to one year of supervised probation and paid his fine. There is no evidence 
of any additional questionable behavior. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant presented evidence showing that he is on the right track to establish 
his successful rehabilitation. He noted that he has been involved in constructive 
community involvement and volunteers at a local food pantry and as a teacher’s aid. His 
references described him as a hard-working, dependable, and reliable employee who is 
kind-hearted and dedicated to his family. His father believes Applicant was remorseful 
about the distress his DWI conviction placed on his family. Applicant expressed remorse 
and promised to stay away from bad influences, to concentrate on school, and to help 
his father support his family. Applicant’s criminal behavior was likely the result of his age 
and immaturity. It appears he has learned a hard lesson from his past mistakes.  
 
 Applicant is now fully aware that for him to be eligible for a clearance and his job 
with a federal contractor, he will be required to demonstrate his trustworthiness, 
character, honesty, and good judgment. Any future criminal behavior will destroy the 
trust placed upon him by the Government and show that he is unreliable, untrustworthy, 
and lacks judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His immaturity led 
him to engage in criminal behavior. Considering Applicant’s age at the time of the 
offenses, the circumstances surrounding the offenses, the courts’ actions handling 
those offenses, the passage of time without additional incidents of security concern, his 
performance at work and school, and his positive community involvement, I find that 
Applicant’s evidence is sufficient to establish his successful rehabilitation. Considering 
the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past criminal behavior does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
