 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06880 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations, criminal conduct, and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in 2009, requesting 
Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. On June 26, 2015, the DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F 
(financial considerations), J (criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). Applicant 
responded to the SOR on September 28, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.1  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were revised on June 8, 2017, 
and are applicable to all decisions issued thereafter. 
 
2 
 
The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 6, 2017, scheduling the hearing 
for May 2, 2017.2 The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 9 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE D through 
G, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
May 10, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old guard for a cleared overseas facility.  Since 2015, he 
has been working abroad. He worked for one company from 2001 until 2009.  From 2009 
until 2011, he worked for a defense contractor full time. He graduated from high school in 
1996, and attended a technical institute. He is single and has one child. Applicant has 
held a security clearance since 2003. (GX 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges 33 delinquent debts totaling about $89,000, a 2006 judgment,   
six student loans, and 12 parking tickets or violations. In addition, the SOR alleges under 
Guideline J that Applicant has various incidents since 1995 that involve criminal activity. 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E that Applicant falsified his 2009 SCA and 2012 
subject interview by not reporting any arrests, any financial issues, or work reprimands, 
termination, and not paying traffic fines. He testified at the hearing and he provided 
detailed answers to the SOR. However, the answers to the SOR did not always agree 
with his testimony at the hearing. 
 
Financial 
 
 As to SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he 
denied these accounts because no record was found on his credit report. These medical 
accounts, according to Applicant at the hearing were paid, but he had no documentation 
to prove his claim because they were from 2009. (Tr. 18) He elaborated that they were 
from a worker’s compensation case. (Tr. 19) 
 
 Applicant admitted his student loan debt in SOR 1.d. and 1.e, and stated that the 
loans were consolidated and current.  The 2017 credit report (AX B) submitted by 
Applicant shows three education loans as current. It is not clear from the record evidence 
if they include the other three student loans alleged. 
 
 SOR 1.f alleges a debt for a Department of Veterans Affairs charged-off account 
in the amount of $8,757. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied because he found 
no balance on his credit report. At the hearing, he stated that it was paid. It was a car 
repossession, and he does not owe any money. (Tr. 21)  
 
                                                          
2 Since June 9, 2016, Applicant and DC attempted to arrange a time for a hearing. Applicant was pro se 
and overseas at the time, and it was decided that it was best to have an in-person hearing. 
 
3 
 
 SOR 1.g alleges a charged-off account in the amount of $447. Applicant denied 
this account because it was not on his credit report. At the hearing, he stated that it was 
paid years ago, but he has no documentation. (Tr. 22) 
 
 As to SOR 1.h, a collection account in the amount of $3,882, Applicant denied the 
account in his answer and stated that he had no recollection of any such account at the 
hearing. He also stated that it is not on his credit report. (Tr. 22) 
 
 As to SOR 1.i, for another student loan in the amount of $29,134, Applicant 
answered that the account was being disputed and a payment plan arranged.  At the 
hearing, he stated that the loan is current and is reflected on his 2017 credit report. (Tr. 
23) 
 
 Applicant denied  SOR allegations 1.j,k,m,n,o,p,q,r,s,t,u,v because they were not 
on his credit report. At the hearing, he stated that allegation 1.j through 1.o, were 
researched, but he could not find any such accounts. (Tr. 23)  The 2013 credit report 
shows that these were parking tickets that went to collection. (GX 6) However, as a post-
hearing submission, he submitted a packet of 18 traffic system citation reports, dated from 
2007 through 2015, for various violations, which could not be aligned with the above SOR 
allegations.  (AX E) 
 
 SOR 1.l in the amount of $239, a collection account, was denied because he could 
not find it on a credit report. At the hearing, he also denied the account. (Tr. 24) 
 
 As to SOR allegations 1.m to 1.v, Applicant denied owing the accounts. His answer 
stated that he researched them, and he has no knowledge of them. (Tr. 25) 
 
 As to the SOR allegation 1.w, Applicant  admitted the 2006 judgment of $139, and 
stated that it was paid. 
 
 As to SOR allegation 1.x., a collection account in the amount of $142, Applicant  
denied the account because it was not on his credit report. (Tr. 26) 
 
 SOR allegation 1.y, a collection account in the amount of $1,533, he denied the 
account because it was not on his credit report. 
 
 SOR 1.z is a collection account in the amount of $510. Applicant   denied because 
he could not find it on his credit report. 
 
 SOR 1.aa is a charged-off account in the amount of $21,988, Applicant stated that 
it was a student loan and is a duplicate of 1.i. He stated that it is current. (Tr. 26) 
 
 SOR 1.bb, a charged-off account in the amount of $8,757, Applicant stated he 
denied the debt, and it is a duplicate of 1.f. 
 
 SOR 1.cc and 1.dd are collection accounts totaling about $10,000.for student loans 
and Applicant states that his 2017 credit report shows them as current. (Tr. 27, AX B)  
 
4 
 
 
 SOR 1.ee is a charged-off account in the amount of $340. Applicant admitted the 
debt and stated that it was paid. He referred to his credit report. SOR 1.gg is the same 
company but a different amount ($111), he stated that this account is paid. (Tr. 29) 
 
 Applicant denied SOR 1.ff, an account past due in the amount of $150, because it 
was not on the credit report.  
 
 At the hearing, GX 9 was introduced for identification to show that Applicant has 
an additional $12,000 in state tax liens from the years 2015, 2016, and 2017. (Tr. 7) 
Applicant did not object to the documents. The SOR was not amended, but the 
information is considered in light of the whole person. (Tr. 7) As a post-hearing 
submission, Applicant submitted an installment agreement request to the IRS stating that 
he owed $18,352, and signed on February 3, 2017. This is not related to the state tax 
liens, nor is there any record that it was sent or approved. (AX F) 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for not having documentation for the items that he paid 
was that he had been working abroad for a few years and did not get mail. However, he 
lived in state A, at least since 2000, but he moved frequently.  (GX 1) The debts precede 
the time of his working abroad. The submissions that were presented at the hearing 
reflected that not until July 2015 did he enroll in a credit restoration service. (AX A) That 
was approximately one month after receiving the SOR. In addition, the Applicant 
presented as AX B, a 2015 letter of dispute to credit bureau that he was now disputing 
almost all of the SOR allegations and asking the company to remove them because of 
length of time. He noted that he is not working with the restoration company now. (Tr. 79) 
He did not produce documentation that he paid any debts. He simply relied on the fact 
that the accounts are not on his 2017 credit bureau report. He does show on his 2017 
credit report that he is current on some student loans. (AX B) 
 
  When he was interviewed in 2009, he was confronted with the fact that he listed 
no financial issues on his 2009 SCA. He told the investigator that he had not paid one 
student loan since 2008 because he had difficulty with the system and that he had 
insufficient funds.  He was also confronted with various financial accounts, but he stated 
that he knew nothing about them. (GX 2)  
 
 In Applicant’s 2012 interview, he noted that he was on unpaid leave from May 2011 
to July 2011. He also explained that he stopped his child support payments in 2009 due 
to no income. His pay at one point was garnished for child support payments. He also 
spoke about a vehicle repossession in 2009 and other debts. He intended to resolve the 
matters as soon as possible. (GX2) 
 
 In 2013, Applicant’s answers to DOHA interrogatories reflected that the only 
payments he was making was to the Sallie Mae student loan ($29,134) but he provided 
no proof. He was aware of the other SOR accounts that were not paid or resolved at that 
time. He spoke about debts turned over to a collection agency.  He stated that he had not 
made payments on one account since 2006. A 2013 credit bureau report was attached 
and showed the delinquent accounts. He did nothing to resolve any financial matter until 
 
5 
 
2015 after receiving the SOR. (GX 2) He admitted not being financial stable and not 
having had financial counseling. 
 
 As to the student loans, Applicant had no idea what the total amount of the student 
loans were. He stated that they had all been consolidated and are current. However in 
his 2015 letter (AX A) he denied some of them. The student loans are from 2005 when 
Applicant attended the technical institute. (Tr. 70) The SOR lists six different student loans 
in amounts ranging from $3,000 to 29,000.  It is not clear from the record which loans 
were consolidated and for what amount. 
 
 At the end of the hearing, when questioned about his knowledge of many of the 
accounts, Applicant responded that he believes some of the items are fraudulent.  (Tr. 
75) At the time of the hearing, Applicant earned about $90,000 a year and received a 
living expense. He did not list a net remainder on his personal financial statement and did 
not produce a current one for the record. Applicant has not provided documentary 
evidence of financial counseling. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR 2.a -2.n listed 14 allegations that ranged in time from 1995 through 2012. 
Some were traffic violations, one was theft over $500, two counts of false imprisonment 
and assault, false statement to police, disorderly in public, driving without tags, expired 
registration plates, malicious destruction of property, solicitation, theft less than $300, and 
failure to appear. (GX 4) 
 
 Applicant pled guilty to 2.a to 2.d., which were traffic violations. In some cases the 
cases were dismissed. As to 2.e, a charge of theft over $500 in 2008, the case was nol 
prossed. As to 2.f through 2.h, these were traffic violations from 2007 and 2008. In 2.i, a 
2004 false imprisonment and assault was alleged. Applicant denied the offense and the 
case was nol prossed. In 2004, Applicant received probation and community service for 
malicious destruction of property and failure to appear. (2.j) As to 2.k, in 2002, he was 
charged with solicitation for lewd purposes. Applicant stated that it was a joke. (Tr. 36) As 
to 2.l, theft less than $300, he denied. The case was nol prossed. In 1996 (2.m) he was 
charged with false statement to a police officer. He pled guilty and received a PBJ.  In 
1995, he was charged with disorderly conduct and received probation before judgment 
and paid a fine. He paid the traffic tickets and submitted as a post-hearing submission 
documentation. (AX E) 
 
 In his 2003 interview statement, Applicant discussed the 1995, 1996, 1998, and 
2003 incidents. (GX 3) He acknowledged the incidents. The Government introduced 
evidence to support the criminal allegations. (GX 4)  
 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges in 3.a-3.e, that in 2009, Applicant was issued memos for 
corrective action, a security violation for leaving sensitive mail in a truck over a weekend 
 
6 
 
and failure to turn in certain reports. He discussed these events in his interviews in 2009 
and admitted that he had received reprimands. He denied   these allegations in his answer 
to the SOR. At the hearing, he denied the 2000 termination from employment, but the 
record reflects that he was terminated on November 24, 2000, after receiving numerous 
warnings and disciplinary actions. (3.f) At the hearing, he denied the allegation. (Tr. 40) 
He stated he resigned. As to allegation3.g, during his 2012 interview, he denied because 
he maintained he had not received any corrective actions. (Tr. 40, GX2) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, he denied 3.a-3.f, but admitted 3.g. because he was not 
aware of the written warnings. He related this during his 2012 interview.  
 
 SOR 3.f alleges that Applicant was terminated from employment in 2000 for 
unsatisfactory performance after warnings. Applicant denied these allegations. Denied 
the various warnings and failure to deliver packages. However the evidence in the record 
supports the allegations. (GX 2, 3, 4, and 5) 
 
 SOR allegations 3.h to 3.n concern falsifications on his 2009 security clearance 
application with respect to Section 22 (Police Record) and Section 26 (Financial Record). 
.Applicant neither admitted nor denied these allegation but stated that he was rushed in 
the process. At the hearing, he stated that he takes full responsibility for the action. (Tr. 
41) He added that he had no intention of withholding information. (Tr.41) 
 
     Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
 
7 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern under criminal conduct:  
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless 
of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
  Applicant’s criminal conduct with regard to allegations from 1995 until 2012 
sufficiently invokes the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I reviewed the 
facts against each mitigating condition. The following may be relevant: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense; 
and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant ‘s last violation was in 2012. He has nothing else on his record, but since 
2015, he was working abroad. He has a pattern of criminal and rule violations stemming 
from 1995 to 2012. In some instances the cases were dismissed. He had an excuse for 
some of the criminal charges and did not seem to recognize that he needed to take some 
responsibility. There was insufficient evidence presented to show that Applicant’s overall 
criminal behavior is unlikely to recur or that he sought counseling to address it.  Although 
not cited as a criminal offense, the traffic behavior denotes a significant lack of judgment, 
and calls into question Applicant’s willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
Of note, Applicant did not submit independent character statements, or statements from 
family members attesting to inaccuracies in the allegations, his innocence, or 
rehabilitation. No mitigation is appropriate. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 
9 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems extending over many years, and incurred 
multiple delinquent debts that are unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed lack of documentation that he paid for some accounts because 
he was working abroad is not plausible. He lived in the states when the debts occurred. 
In addition he has had a long history of financial issues.  He has had steady employment 
except for a period of a few months. He also relied on having no knowledge of the 
accounts or that they did not appear on his credit report. He revealed his late child support 
in interviews with investigators. As post-hearing submission, he presented a one page  
sheet showing payments he made in late 2016 and 2017. (AX G) He noted that some 
accounts had defaulted. It does appear that recently he is paying some student loans that 
stem from 2005-2006. He waited until 2015 to ask a company to help him resolve the 
financial issues. He has been on notice since his 2013 DOHA interrogatories. He failed 
to show good-faith efforts to adequately address his financial issues while he was 
employed. He wrote to a credit bureau to attempt to have the debts removed due to age 
 
10 
 
of the debts. He acknowledge that he would resolve his debts when he was interviewed 
in 2012.  
 
 The majority of Applicant’s financial delinquencies have not been resolved and 
there is insufficient evidence to determine that they will be resolved within a reasonable 
period. For the unresolved debts, I am unable to find that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made good-faith efforts to pay his debts or negotiate good-faith 
solutions. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.3 An applicant’s level 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.4 
 
  Applicant did not report his delinquent financial accounts or 2009 traffic violations 
and the theft charge on his 2009 SCA. He denied intentionally falsifying the SCA, and 
attributed the omissions as being rushed or unaware of the issues. He has a long history 
of holding a security clearance. I find Applicant’s failure to report delinquent debts and 
theft charge intentional. I did not find him credible in his testimony regarding the fact that 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
11 
 
he had no intention of withholding information from the Government. I find that he 
intentionally falsified his 2009 SCA. AG ¶ 16 applies to SOR 3.h through 3.n. As to 3a. 
through 3.g, he was not credible in his denials. 
 
   
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 I find no mitigating condition applicable to Applicant’s failure to report his financial 
delinquencies and the theft charge in 2009. Applicant was well aware of the reporting 
requirements since he has had a long history of completing similar applications. He was 
aware of his delinquent debts and failed to report them. His knowing lack of candor in 
general raises questions about his trustworthiness and willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. No mitigating condition fully applies to alleviate the personal conduct 
concerns raised by the allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
12 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F, J, and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s testimony and documents provided before and after the 
hearing. I understand that Applicant was working abroad for the past two years, but his 
debts precede that time. He did not appear credible in his testimony at the hearing. He 
either relied on the absence of the accounts on a credit report, disputed them to a credit 
bureau, or waited until July 2015 to contact a company to restore his credit. He has not 
shown past financial responsibility. He also has state and federal tax liens. He has had a 
history from 1995 to 2012 of either civil violations or criminal ones. He did not appear to 
take any of them seriously. He was terminated from a position, but denied that 
termination, despite concrete evidence to the contrary. He also stated that maybe the 
financial items were fraudulent.  I am convinced that he knowingly failed to submit truthful 
answers on his SCAs as noted above. His personal conduct  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.gg     Against  Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.n:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.n     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
