KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Board cannot consider any new evidence on appeal. Additionally it has no
authority to grant an applicant an extension for the purpose of obtaining more evidence. The
Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the
Judge committed harmful error. Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the
part of the Judge. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06535.a1
DATE: 09/22/2017
DATE: September 22, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-06535
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 19, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On July 5, 2017, after considering
the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D.
Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s brief contains no assertion of harmful error by the Judge.  Rather, it includes
information about his military service and civilian employment experience and notes that Applicant
has held a clearance for many years without incident or concern.  Much of Applicant’s brief consists
of new evidence, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
We do not review a case de novo.  Our authority is limited to cases in which the appealing
party has alleged that the Judge committed harmful error.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01778 at 2
(App. Bd. Jan. 31, 2017).  Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error by the Judge. 
Therefore, the Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board 
