1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ADP Case No. 15-07469 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from her problematic financial condition. 
She did not, however, mitigate the trustworthiness concern raised by her personal 
conduct. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on April 8, 2015. On April 15, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for financial considerations and 
Guideline E for personal conduct.1 The SOR detailed the factual reasons for the action 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudication Guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
2 
 
under the guidelines known as Guideline F for financial considerations and Guideline E 
for personal conduct.  Applicant answered the SOR on May 4, 2016, and requested a 
decision based on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On October 18, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM).2 The FORM was sent to Applicant on October 24, 2016, and 
Applicant received the FORM on November 2, 2016.3 Applicant responded to the FORM 
on December 6, 2016, enclosing documents which I have marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through J and which documents are admitted into evidence without objection.  
Included in the FORM were twelve items of evidence, items three through 12 of which are 
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10.4 Exhibits 1 through 8 and 10 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. Exhibit 9 is discussed below. The case was 
assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
Because of the age of this case, I sua sponte reopened the record on August 31, 
2017, and so advised Applicant and Department Counsel. I did so to allow Applicant to 
(1) review the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (effective June 8, 2017), and (2) 
supplement the record to update the current status of her indebtedness. I left the record 
open until close of business September 15, 2017, which was then extended to September 
29, 2017, without objection. Applicant submitted additional documents updating the status 
the SOR debts, which I have marked as AE K through O and are admitted into evidence, 
without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The FORM includes Exhibit 9, which is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the July 2015 background investigation. The 
ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.5 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
                                                          
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My decision and 
formal findings under the revised Guidelines F and E would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated October 24, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated November 2, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 Items one and two are the SOR and Applicant’s answer, respectively. Because the SOR and Applicant’s 
answer are the pleadings in this case, they are not marked as exhibits.  
 
5 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process. Judge Ra’anan raises a number of pertinent questions 
about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
requirement. The footnote is prominently prefaced with a bolded, upper-case notice to 
Applicant and flagging for Applicant the importance of the footnote, which then explains 
the concepts of authentication and waiver. In a case such as this, where Applicant has 
responded to the FORM, it is fair to conclude that Applicant read the footnote, understood 
it, and chose not to object to the ROI. The ROI is, therefore, admissible.6  
  
                                             Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is 53 years old and has an associate’s degree in nursing. She is divorced 
(since July 2001) and has two adult sons. Since February 2013, she has worked for a 
defense contractor. Applicant is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public 
trust, because her sponsor provides healthcare services to the Department of Defense. 
Eligibility is necessary, because a job with her sponsor would involve access to sensitive 
but unclassified information. 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2001 that 
was converted to a Chapter 13 in January 2002 and discharged for hardship in February 
2004. The SOR alleged a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in April 2011 that was dismissed in June 
2012 for failure to make plan payments. In addition, the SOR alleged 18 delinquent debts 
totaling $102,479. 
 
 Applicant admitted the bankruptcy filings, with explanations. The 2001 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy was filed, because she was injured in an automobile accident that put her out 
work for three months. It was converted to a Chapter 13 in 2002, and because Applicant 
was out of work, she could not make the plan payments, which resulted in a hardship 
discharge in February 2004. Applicant offered no explanation for what caused her to file 
the 2011 Chapter 13 bankruptcy. She did, however, state that she allowed that 
bankruptcy to be dismissed, on advice of counsel.7 She also attributed one of the SOR 
debts, SOR ¶ 1.c, to medical bills incurred due to a heart attack she suffered in April 
2015.8 As noted below, that debt has been resolved.  
 
According to Applicant’s answer to the SOR and her initial and supplemental 
responses to the FORM, the following is the status of the SOR debts (with supporting 
documentation cited in footnotes):9  
 
                                                          
6 This is consistent with a recent Appeal Board Decision. ISCR Case No. 15-05047 at 4 (Nov. 8, 2017) (ROI 
is admissible where applicant’s response to a FORM did not object to the admission of the ROI).  
 
7 Answer, p. 6; AE A. 
 
8 Answer, p. 6.  
 
9 Applicant admitted five of the SOR debts. Even for those she denied, for eight of them she answered 
that they were paid or were being paid. Answer ¶¶ 1.c through 1.t.  
 
4 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, f, i, l, m, and r have been placed with a credit counseling and 
consolidation agency, to which Applicant makes monthly payments of $892.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j is under a payment plan with the creditor.11 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d has been paid.12 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.o, p, q, and s have been paid.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e has been paid.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g has been paid.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h has been paid but no supporting documentation provided.16 
 
SOR ¶1.k is a mortgage account on which Applicant is current.17 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n: Applicant has a payment agreement with the creditor.18 
 
SOR ¶ 1.t has been paid.19 
 
In sum, all of Applicant’s SOR debts have been resolved. She paid her debts or is 
paying them.   
 
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
her April 2011 Chapter 13 bankruptcy and the SOR delinquent debts in her security 
clearance application. There is no question that Applicant did not disclose that bankruptcy 
                                                          
10 Answer, p. 9; AE A and AE B.  
 
11 Answer, pp. 1-2, 9-10, 13; AE J.  
 
12 Answer, pp. 2, 14; AE F.  
 
13 Answer, pp, 7, 9, 14-16; AE A, D, G, H, and I.  
 
14 AE K.   
 
15 AE A and AE L.  
 
16 AE A. I was unable to find the document Applicant submitted showing payment of this debt. In any event, 
the debt is immaterial ($79).  
  
17 AE N.  
 
18 AE A and AE M. Under the agreement, Applicant makes monthly payments to Halstead Financial 
Services, LLC.  
 
19 AE A and AE O. 
 
5 
 
or the SOR debts in her security clearance application.20 Applicant’s handwritten answer 
to the SOR denied that she filed a bankruptcy in 2011, but then she stated that “all 
remaining payments were made to XX law firm.” That was the firm that represented 
Applicant in that bankruptcy.21 She denied the SOR Guideline E allegation stating: “I did 
not deliberately fail to disclose any information – I did not have documents with dates in 
front of me, nor did I know that some accounts were present.”22 During Applicant’s July 
2015 background interview, she was asked about the April 2011 Chapter 13 bankruptcy, 
and the summary of that interview reports: “The subject had no knowledge of this 
bankruptcy. She has never filed for bankruptcy and could not explain why this was on her 
credit report. She intends to investigate and attempt resolution. She did not list this 
bankruptcy on her security questionnaire because she had no knowledge of it.”23 The 
bankruptcy court docket entries show the filing of the Chapter 13 voluntary petition on her 
behalf as the debtor on April 21, 2011, numerous court actions, and its dismissal in June 
2012.24 One of the unsecured creditors listed in her bankruptcy filing is the same creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e (a debt she admitted).25 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
20 GE 1.  
 
21 GE 6. In her typed response to the SOR, she repeated: “All remaining payments for the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy were made to attorney XX [her attorney in the bankruptcy proceeding].” 
 
22 Answer.  
 
23 GE 9. 
  
24 GE 6. 
 
25 GE 6, p. 24 (Schedule F).  I do not suggest that that bankruptcy debt is the same debt as alleged in the 
SOR, only that Applicant must have known of that creditor when she listed it in her bankruptcy filing.  
6 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,26 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.27 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
                                                          
26 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
27 AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and   
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.   
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had problematic financial 
conditions sufficient to raise a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F. She appears 
to be unable to satisfy her debts, and she has a history of not meeting her financial 
obligations. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. The next inquiry is whether any of the 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 The debts that raised trustworthiness concerns were delinquent when the SOR 
was issued in April 2016 and remained in arrears when the FORM was filed in October 
2016. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was in an automobile accident in 2001 that put her out of work for three 
months, necessitating the filing of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2001. That accident, 
however, does not appear to have caused the indebtedness that prompted the issuance 
of the SOR. Nor does the heart attack in April 2015 appear to have caused the SOR 
indebtedness, save for one account (SOR ¶ 1.c, which has been resolved). The auto 
accident in 2001 and her heart attack in 2015 are circumstances largely beyond her 
control, but there is no causal nexus between those circumstances and the SOR 
indebtedness. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 By the time Applicant answered the SOR, she had placed six of her SOR debts 
with a credit counseling and consolidation agency. With her answer and her initial 
response to the FORM, Applicant established that she had resolved $20,103 of the total 
SOR debt of $102,479. With her supplemental response to the FORM, Applicant showed 
that she had resolved all but $79 of her SOR debt. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply.28
      
                                                          
28 Although Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s responses to the FORM, he did argue that 
because the majority of Applicant’s attempts to resolve her indebtedness occurred after the issuance of the 
SOR, those efforts should be given little mitigating weight. Counsel’s argument is well-taken, but 
recognizing the post-SOR timing of those efforts does not wholly negate their mitigating effect.    
8 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information.”29 A statement is false or dishonest 
when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material 
information is not deliberate if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the 
information, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities; and,  
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing 
or omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved in 
making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility determination, 
or other official government representative. 
 In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances.30 Here, the SOR alleged 
that in completing her application for a public trust position, Applicant deliberately failed 
to disclose her April 2011 bankruptcy filing and the SOR debts. There is no question that 
Applicant did not disclose any of that information in her security clearance application. 
The question is whether her omission was deliberate.  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that she had filed a bankruptcy petition 
in April 2011, but in that same answer she identified the person who appears in 
bankruptcy court filings as her attorney.  And one of the SOR creditors is named as an 
unsecured creditor in Applicant’s bankruptcy filing. The bankruptcy court recorded 
numerous activities in her case from its filing in April 2011 until its dismissal in June 2012.  
Common sense tells us that the filing of a bankruptcy petition (especially a second one) 
and living through those proceedings must be memorable personal financial experiences, 
ones not easily overlooked or forgotten. Adjudications of public trust applications are held 
                                                          
 
29 AG ¶ 15.   
 
30 AG ¶¶ 2(a) and (d)(1)-(9) (explaining the “whole-person” concept and factors).  
 
9 
 
to a commonsense standard.31 Using that standard, I find that Applicant deliberately 
omitted information about her 2011 bankruptcy and delinquent debts from her  application 
for a public trust position. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. I find no mitigating conditions that apply 
here.   
 
Conclusion 
 
The record creates doubt about Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also considered the “whole-person” concept.32 Accordingly, I 
conclude that Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant her eligibility for access 
to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.t:           For Applicant 
 
            Paragraph 2, Guideline E                           Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.                                      Against Applicant  
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
31 See ISCR Case No. 00-0628 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2003). 
 
32 See note 30, supra.  
 
