 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-07011 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Carmel Tomlinson, Personal Representative 
 
September 8, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 3, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On July 12, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 24, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on October 5, 2016. The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 27, 2017.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A and B, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and called one additional witness. 
DOHA received the final transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 6, 2017. Applicant 
requested that the record remain open for the receipt of additional exhibits. She submitted 
Applicant Exhibits C through L, which were all admitted without objection, and the record 
closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old, and widowed. She is seeking to obtain national security 
eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she has a history of having past-due debts, including tax liens. Therefore she is 
potentially unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with explanations. She also 
submitted additional evidence to support her request for a finding of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant was married from January 1983 until her husband’s sudden death in 
June 2007. During their marriage Applicant was the bread winner, while her husband was 
supposed to take care of their financial affairs, including preparing and filing taxes. He did 
not do a good job, a fact she only learned about after his death when she began to 
discover they had many past-due debts, including tax debts. (Answer; Tr. 18-23.) 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006; as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of all of the debts alleged in the SOR is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that she had a Federal tax lien filed against her in 2008 for 
the amount of $1,087. After her husband’s death, Applicant discovered that her husband 
had not been filing their Federal tax returns, or paying taxes, for many years. She began 
negotiating with the IRS in 2009 about back taxes. Shortly afterward Applicant began to 
pay off her tax debt with the Federal government. Applicant paid over $23,000 to the IRS 
in accordance with her installment payment agreements over several years. Based on 
the extensive documentation supplied by Applicant, she is in compliance with her 
payment arrangements with the IRS, and all liens have been released. Based on all of 
the available information, this lien appears to be in error. This allegation is found for 
Applicant. (Applicant Exhibits C and D; Tr. 23-27, 41.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $245. She 
submitted documentation showing that this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit B at Reference B; Tr. 36.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $3,840. 
Applicant testified that she has attempted to resolve this debt without success. As 
described below, she is currently paying off a substantial tax debt to her state (SOR 1.i). 
Once she resolves the tax debt, Applicant testified that she will pay off this debt as soon 
as possible. (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $816. 
She submitted documentation showing that this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit B at Reference D; Tr. 37.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $1,244. 
She submitted documentation showing that this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit B at Reference E; Tr. 38.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $1,362. 
She submitted documentation showing that this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit B at Reference F; Tr. 38.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $222. She 
submitted documentation showing that this debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. 
(Applicant Exhibit B at Reference G; Tr. 38.) 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $1,240. 
Applicant reached an agreement with this creditor, and made consistent monthly 
payments until this debt was paid off. She submitted documentation showing that this 
debt has been paid in full. It is resolved. (Applicant Exhibits I, J, K, and L; Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted to having a lien filed against her by her state taxing authority 
in the amount of $9,449. Applicant submitted documentation showing that she has been 
working with her state taxing authority to resolve all of her back taxes. Once again, this 
action was necessary because her husband was not filing tax returns in a timely fashion, 
or paying the resulting taxes. She submitted evidence showing that she entered into a 
payment agreement with the state in April 2016, and has been making consistent 
payments since then. The payments are taken out of her bank account automatically. The 
tax debt as of February 7, 2017, was $11,837. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant 
Exhibits A at Reference 4, E, F, G, and H; Tr. 30-34, 41-42, 46-48.) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. She makes a sufficient income, is 
able to maintain her household without problems, and the most recent credit report in the 
record shows no new delinquent accounts. In addition to herself, Applicant provides 
financial support for her disabled brother. (Government Exhibit 5; Tr. 27-30, 43-45, 49-
55.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 A co-worker of Applicant’s testified on her behalf. The witness extolled Applicant’s 
abilities, her trustworthiness, and strongly recommended her for a position of trust. (Tr. 
57-63.) She also submitted letters of recommendation from her current supervisor, a 
former supervisor, and two other co-workers. (Applicant Exhibit A at Reference 5.) Her 
former supervisor states, “She [Applicant] is always dependable, reliable, hard-working, 
conscientious, honest, [and] courteous.” The other letters are of similar import.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
5 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had several past-due debts, as well as tax liens. All three of these 
conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant faced serious and unexpected financial difficulties after the sudden death 
of her husband in 2007. In addition to the normal emotional and financial difficulties facing 
new widows, Applicant quickly discovered that her husband had not been truthful with her 
about their financial situation. She has worked diligently for several years to resolve her 
tax issues with the IRS, and has successfully done so. She is current on an acceptable 
payment plan with her state taxing authority. Applicant has paid all but one of the past-
due debts alleged in the SOR. As her financial situation gets more stable, she credibly 
tetsified that she will pay that debt as well. The Appeal Board has stated, “An applicant is 
not required to show that she has completely paid off her indebtedness, only that she has 
established a reasonable plan to resolve her debts and has taken significant actions to 
 
 
7 
 
 
implement that plan.”2 Her current financial status is stable, and she evinces a credible 
intent and ability to maintain that stability into the future. She has fully mitigated all the 
allegations in the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding her financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a 
security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006)). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
