 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No. 15-04862 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant  failed  to mitigate the alleged financial trustworthiness concerns. 
National security eligibility for a position of trust is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006; and the AG effective within the DOD for SORs issued after June 8, 2017.1  
 
 On March 1, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to have his 
                                                 
1I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to 
Applicant on May 4, 2016, and received by him on June 15, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
documents or objections to the Government’s Items; hence, Items 1 through 7 are 
admitted into evidence. On July 1, 2017, the Department of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR, and provided 
explanations.  (Item 1)  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married. He completed a bachelor’s degree in 2010. 
He started working for his current employer, a health concern, in 2013. He was 
unemployed  or underemployed on various occasions prior to this position. (GE 2.)  
  
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from December 2015, and November 2014, 
the SOR alleged 20 delinquent debts that became delinquent between 2009 and 2014, 
and totaled about $27,399. (GE 3, GE 4) The majority of the debt is the result of medical 
debts and student loans. (Answer to SOR) 
 
 Applicant provided no documentation that he voluntarily paid or resolved any of 
the delinquent debts. In June 2014, his wages were garnished to pay the student loans. 
He claimed he has paid $100 a month since 2014. He stated it is his intention to pay his 
debts and unpaid loans.  None of his debt is related to gambling or alcohol. He has never 
used debt consolidation or obtained financial counseling. (Item 5) 
 
  During his March 2015 investigative interview, he told the investigator that he 
would contact his creditors. (Item 5) During that interview, he was confronted with a 2012 
tax lien. He was not aware of the lien, and stated he would follow up after the interview 
and make arrangements to pay. In his answer to the SOR, he went to college to better 
his employment opportunities, but he had not found employment to enable him to repay 
the student loans. He stated that he is doing his best.  
  
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
 
3 
 
 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 
7 of EO 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant 
shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
 
4 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Beginning in 2009, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he has been 
unable or unwilling to fully resolve. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness 
concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 The alleged delinquent debts are ongoing, unresolved, and continue to cast doubt 
on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. There is some evidence to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) because Applicant explained his unemployment and medical 
bills as reasons for the circumstances underlying his financial problems. He did not submit 
evidence that he participated in credit or financial counseling. There are no clear 
indications that his old SOR-alleged debts are under control. The evidence does not 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant’s pay is being garnished for the student 
loans. He did not contact creditors. Thus, there is no mitigation, which demonstrated a 
good-faith effort to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, through 1.t under. AG ¶ 20(d.) 
Applicant did not provide evidence to substantiate a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of any debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 37-year-old 
married man, who was unemployed and underemployed on various occasions. He went 
to school to better his opportunities for jobs.  During an interview in 2015, he was placed 
on notice that the Government had concerns about his delinquent debts. In 2015, the 
Government issued a SOR to him, alleging delinquent debts. In May 2016, the 
Government’s FORM specifically informed him that he failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the allegations in the SOR, and gave him 30 days to submit additional 
 
 
6 
 
 
information. He did not do that. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a position of trust. 
He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under the 
guidelines for financial considerations. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs: 1.a-1.t:   Against Applicant 
                    
                         Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
  
 
                                              
 
NOREEN A LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
