1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ADP Case No. 15-03904 
   ) 
Applicant for Trustworthiness Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Although Applicant’s financial problems were caused largely by circumstances 
beyond her control, she failed to provide enough evidence to carry her burden of proving 
that she was in the process of resolving her financial problems. Applicant’s application for 
eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On January 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable 
to find Applicant eligible to occupy an ADP position. The DOD CAF took the action under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On February 12, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting all of the 
allegations, and requested a decision based on the administrative record instead of a 
 
2 
 
hearing. On May 4, 2016, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). Applicant received the FORM on May 12, 2016, and filed a response on June 5, 
2016. The case was assigned to me on March 21, 2017. On July 14, 2017, I re-opened the 
record, extending it to July 21, 2017, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
exhibits. Applicant did not submit any additional exhibits, and I closed the record on July 
21, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP 
position under the new AG.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 53-year-old married woman with three adult children. She  graduated 
from  high school in 1981, served in the U.S. Navy from 1986 to 1994, when  was 
honorably discharged, and earned a bachelor’s degree in 2012. (Item 3 at 9-10) Since 
2013, she has worked for a federal government contractor as a document merger. 
 
 Applicant has incurred approximately $16,500 of delinquent debt. Her financial 
problems stem from a 16-month period of unemployment from March 2012 to July 2013. 
(Item 3 at 11) In Applicant’s SOR answer in February 2016, she promised to begin making 
payments by March 2016 toward the satisfaction of the debts alleged in subparagraphs 
1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.m, 1.o, and 1.p, totaling approximately $8,100, and to begin making 
payments toward the satisfaction of the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.c in May 2016. 
(Item 2 at 2-3) In addition, she contended that she had paid the debt alleged in 
subparagraph 1.l, totaling $537, through monthly payments. She provided no 
substantiating evidence. It was unclear from her answer what plans, if any, she had 
established for satisfying the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.f - 1.k, and subparagraphs 
1.n and 1.q.   
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she provided proof that she paid the debts 
alleged in subparagraphs 1.c, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.n. These debts total $2,930. Also, she 
provided proof that she paid two unlisted debts, totaling $1,652. She did not provide any 
evidence either supporting her contention that she had paid subparagraph 1.l, or that she 
had initiated any payment plans towards the satisfaction of the other debts.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating  conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable decision. Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must 
consider the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the 
nine adjudicative process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 
 
Ruling of Evidence 
 
 Item 4 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on December 16, 2014. Such reports are inadmissible without 
authenticating witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this 
document in my disposition of this case.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 
18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
 Applicant’s SOR delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(b), “unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of ability to do so,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems stemmed from a lengthy period of unemployment 
between March 2012 and July 2013. Since then, she has begun paying her debts. To date, 
she has satisfied the SOR debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.c. 1.h, and 1.j, and 1.n, 
totaling $2,930, and she has satisfied several unlisted debts totaling $1,782. This is 
sufficient for me to resolve the aforementioned subparagraphs in her favor, and to 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) and AG ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
 Applicant has the burden of proof to establish that her bills are either paid or being 
paid. In her answer, she contended that she had either satisfied or was about to begin 
making payments towards the satisfaction of seven SOR debts totaling approximately 
$8,100. Her response to the FORM, filed six months after her answer, contains no proof 
that she has either satisfied, or has begun making payments, as promised. When afforded 
the opportunity to provide substantiating evidence when I re-opened the record, she failed 
to do so. Consequently, absent any supporting documentation, I cannot conclude that 
these remaining SOR debts have been resolved, and given that the total of unresolved 
SOR debts and the number of debts of uncertain status is nearly four times greater than 
the amount of satisfied SOR debts, I cannot conclude that her financial problems are being 
5 
 
resolved, or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused largely by circumstances beyond her 
control. However, she did not submit enough evidence for me to gauge whether her 
financial problems were under control. Under these circumstances, she has failed to 
demonstrate that she has reduced the likelihood that her financial problems will continue. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against  Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.o – 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s application to work in an ADP position is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
