 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-06782 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Pro se 
 
September 14, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 1, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On May 23, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 27, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on August 9, 2016. The case was assigned to me on August 17, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on November 21, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 25, 2017.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 2017. Applicant requested that the record remain open 
for the receipt of additional exhibits. He submitted Applicant Exhibit E, which was admitted 
without objection, and the record closed.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 43 years old, and married with three children. He is seeking to obtain 
national security eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a history of having past-due debts, including taxes. Therefore he is 
potentially unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f, with 
explanations. He denied allegations 1.a, 1.e, and 1.g. He also submitted additional 
evidence to support his request for a finding of national security eligibility. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $23,405 in past-due debts and taxes. 
Support for the existence and amounts of these debts is found in Applicant’s Answer, and 
other admissions. The debts are also set forth in credit reports concerning Applicant dated 
April 25, 2015; August 9, 2016; and January 18, 2017. (Applicant Exhibits 1, 2, 3, 4, and 
5.) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in approximately 2011, when he left a well-
paying job. He was unemployed or underemployed for the next few years, until he began 
his current job in March 2015. Once he was gainfully employed full-time, Applicant began 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006; as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
working to resolve his past-due indebtedness, maintain his current payments, and save 
money in case he lost his clearance. (Tr. 17-19, 46-48.) 
 
 The status of all of the debts alleged in the SOR is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant denied owing the Federal government $2,000 in past-due taxes. The 
taxes were because of his decision to liquidate his retirement fund from his employment 
in 2011. He has paid those taxes in full, and does not owe any money to the Federal 
government for other taxes, as shown in documentation from the IRS. This debt is 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibit E at 20-21; Tr. 19-22.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing past-due taxes to his home state in the approximate 
amount of $2,528. He is in negotiation with the state to resolve this debt, and has paid 
$1,000 towards the taxes. Applicant evinces a credible intent to pay off this debt as soon 
as possible. It is being resolved. (Applicant Exhibits C, and E at 19-20; Tr. 22-25, 49.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing an automobile finance company $9,384. He denies 
that his payments were ever past due. Applicant purchased the vehicle in December 
2010. He made consistent monthly payments for three years. When he attempted to make 
his January 2014 payment he found that the company was the subject of Federal charges 
and there was now nowhere to send his money. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 Applicant submitted documentation dated May 29, 2014, from the Federal Trade 
Commission showing that the Commission had brought various charges against the 
finance company because of its practices. The company was fined and subject to a 
consent decree. (Applicant Exhibit E at 13-14, Tr. 28-31.) 
 
 Applicant still had possession of the vehicle, but no title. If he had been able to 
continue making timely monthly payments, like he had been, the debt would have been 
paid in July 2016. When Applicant was hired for his current employment he began 
investigating this debt and discovered that the company was back in business. He began 
negotiations with the creditor, and is making payments in accordance with an agreement 
with them. This debt is being resolved. (Applicant Exhibits B, and E at 12; Tr. 27-28.)  
 
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing a past-due credit card debt in the amount of $495. 
Applicant believed that he had paid this debt in the past, but it is still showing as past due 
on his most recent credit report. Applicant no longer has this credit card. He evinced a 
credible intent to resolve this debt, if it exists, as soon as possible. (Government Exhibit 
5 at 3; Tr. 31-32.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied owing a past-due debt of an unknown amount to this creditor. 
He denied having any knowledge of this creditor, or having a debt with them. The credit 
reports in the record, while stating that a debt was charged off, do not provide a charge-
off figure. Based on all the available information, I find the Government has not met their 
 
 
4 
 
 
burden on this allegation of showing that Applicant owes any amount to this creditor. It is 
found for Applicant. (Government Exhibit 5 at 3; Tr. 32-34.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a past-due automobile loan in the amount of $9,462. 
He has reached a payment arrangement with this creditor, and submitted documentation 
showing that he is making payments in accordance with this agreement. It is being 
resolved. (Applicant Exhibits A, and E at 4-5; Tr. 35-37.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant denied owing a past-due medical debt in the amount of $64. He has 
no knowledge of any past-due medical debt, and his research did not reveal any medical 
debt. The one credit report that shows this debt also states, “Account in Dispute.” Based 
on all the available information, I find the Government has not met their burden on this 
allegation of showing that Applicant owes any amount to this creditor. It is found for 
Applicant. (Government Exhibit 3 at 6; Tr. 37-39.) 
 
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He and his wife make a sufficient 
income, are able to maintain their household without problems, and he provided 
documentation showing that he is paying his normal monthly bills in a timely fashion. 
(Applicant Exhibit E at 7-10; Tr. 43-45, 49-51.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had several past-due debts, as well as Federal and state back taxes. All 
three of these conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant had serious financial problems after leaving his employment in 2011. He 
was not permanently, gainfully, employed until March 2015. At that point he began 
working to resolve his debts. The Federal tax debt has been paid, and he has paid a 
substantial amount of his state tax debt. The two automobile debts (1.c and 1.f) are being 
paid in a manner that is acceptable to the respective creditors. With regard to allegation 
1.c, Applicant proved that the creditor engaged in predatory lending practices. There are 
two small debts, amounting to less than $600, that are not yet resolved. Applicant stated 
that he would work to resolve them as soon as possible. The Appeal Board has stated, 
“An applicant is not required to show that [he] has completely paid off [his] indebtedness, 
only that [he] has established a reasonable plan to resolve [his] debts and has taken 
significant actions to implement that plan.”2 His current financial status is stable, and he 
evinces a credible intent and ability to maintain that stability into the future. He has fully 
mitigated all the allegations in the SOR. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
 
 
                                                 
2ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006)). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is well-respected by 
his manager. (Applicant Exhibit D.) Applicant has mitigated the concerns regarding his 
financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create substantial doubt as to 
Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a security clearance. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
