 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08322 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from India, has mitigated the foreign influence concerns raised 
by his familial and social relationships with individuals who are citizens and residents of 
that country, as well as those concerns raised by his financial interests there. Clearance 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on April 25, 2017, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through C, without objection.  After the hearing, Applicant 
timely submitted AE D through H, which were also admitted without objection.2  I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on May 4, 2017. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Amended Adjudicative Guidelines 
  
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about India. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant facts 
are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, since August 2012. 
He worked for his employer for one year as an independent contractor before being 
offered full-time employment. In connection with his independent contractor work, 
Applicant applied for and was granted public trust eligibility in 2011. His duties now 
require access to classified information. He completed a security clearance application 
in June 2015, disclosing foreign relatives, foreign travel, foreign assets, and foreign 
business interests.4 
 
 Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2009, is originally from India, a 
parliamentary democracy that shares significant strategic interests with the United 
States, including counter-terrorism cooperation. The two countries have increased trade 
in goods and services, cooperate on nuclear policy, and engage in mutual efforts to 
address pollution and climate change. Although largely positive, the relationship 
between the United States and India is not without its concerns. India is an avid 
collector of U.S. proprietary information, and there have been several criminal cases of 
                                                          
2 Correspondence regarding the parties’ post-hearing submissions is appended to the record as HE IV. 
 
3 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE III. 
  
4 Tr. 12, 20-21, 25; GE 1-2; AE D-E. 
 
3 
 
industrial espionage arising out of India, both from private sources and from the 
government itself. Terrorist activity occurs in India, and the country is one of those most 
persistently targeted by foreign and domestic terrorist groups. India has some significant 
problems with human rights. India has good diplomatic relations with Iran and supports 
that country’s efforts to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. India’s largest 
supplier of military systems and spare parts is Russia. Historically the relationship 
between the United States and India has been favorable and beneficial to both 
countries.5 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1998 on a work visa. Applicant’s 
wife of 15 years is also a naturalized U.S. citizen. They have one child, age 11, who is a 
U.S. citizen by birth. Between 1998 and 2004, Applicant worked in the private sector, 
but was not offered an employee-sponsored retirement savings plan. In 2005, Applicant 
started his own business, which he operated until he began his current employment in 
2012. While self-employed, Applicant developed a retirement savings strategy that 
included investing in the emerging Indian real estate market. He bought four properties: 
2 plots of undeveloped land, 1 rental home, and 1 retail space, before he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant maintains bank accounts in India. Applicant uses one 
account to collect rent from his two rental properties. Between 2012 and 2016, he used 
two accounts to provide money to his wife and daughter. Together, these assets are 
valued between $500,000-$600,000 (USD). The rental properties generate 
approximately $20,000 in annual income. Applicant pays taxes to the Indian 
government on his rental income as required. He also pays U.S. federal taxes on his 
foreign earned income and discloses his foreign financial holdings annually to the U.S. 
Department of Treasury as required.6  
 
 In addition to his foreign assets, Applicant has family members who are citizens 
and residents of India. At the time he completed his security clearance application, 
those relatives included his father, brother, sister, and parents-in-law. Applicant’s 
brother is an engineer with an information technology company. His sister does not 
work. Applicant provides some of her financial support, using money in one of his India-
based bank accounts. According to Applicant’s security clearance and public trust 
applications, between 2005 and 2010, he traveled to India twice. During these trips 
Applicant stayed with his sister, and visited family and old school friends. Outside of 
those visits, Applicant maintained weekly telephonic contact with his siblings.7  
 
In 2011, Applicant’s father was diagnosed with a rare degenerative disease. His 
mother-in-law and her sister were diagnosed with cancer. After Applicant’s father and 
mother-in-law received their diagnoses, Applicant’s wife moved to India, taking the 
couple’s young daughter, in order to provide care to the couple’s ill parents. From 2011 
to 2015, Applicant traveled to India every year. Applicant took three extended leaves of 
absences from his job to spend time with his family. In 2013, Applicant took 12 weeks of 
                                                          
5 GE 1; HE III. 
 
6 Tr. 19-20, 22-28, 33, 42-47, 53-55; GE 2; AE F. 
 
7 Tr. 26-27, 33, 36.  
 
4 
 
leave authorized under the Family Medical Leave Act. In 2014, Applicant took one 
month of leave without pay. In 2015, Applicant took five months of unpaid leave, this 
time to help his wife wind down and sell the family entertainment business she operated 
during her residency. Before each leave of absence, Applicant was required to go 
through a lengthy approval process, which included getting permission from his 
government client. Applicant also consulted with his facility security officer to ensure 
that he was meeting all reporting and briefing requirements.8  
  
 Applicant’s father succumbed to his illness in 2013. Applicant’s mother-in-law is 
in remission and no longer requires daily assistance. As a result, Applicant’s wife and 
daughter returned to the United States in August 2016. The couple also wanted their 
daughter to begin intermediate school in the United States. Applicant closed the India-
based bank accounts related to his wife’s business. His other accounts remain open so 
that he can pay his Indian income taxes and provide money to his sister and parents-in-
law as needed.9  
 
Reunited with his wife and daughter, Applicant plans to remain in the United 
States for the near future. Applicant and his wife are employed by U.S.-based 
companies and earn an annual household income of approximately $270,000. They 
have also accumulated almost $800,000 in U.S.-based assets, including real estate and 
savings.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
                                                          
8 Tr35, 37-40, 43; GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
9 Tr. 32, 49.  
 
10 R. 30, 41-42.  
 
5 
 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
 “[F]oreign contacts and interests, including . . . business, financial and property 
interests, are a national security concern if they result in a divided allegiance [or] . . . 
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” Applicant maintains close relationships 
with individuals who are residents and citizens of India. He also holds substantial 
business, financial, and property interests in India. Although the relationship between 
the United States and India is largely favorable, India has a documented history of 
collecting U.S proprietary information. Also, Indian citizens have been involved in 
several criminal cases of industrial espionage against the United States. Based on 
these facts, Applicant’s connections to India raises a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion or personal conflict of 
interest.11  
 
 However, the evidence in the record mitigates these concerns. The foreign 
influence concern in this case was acute while Applicant’s wife and daughter lived in 
India. Their presence increased Applicant’s familial and financial ties to that country. 
Applicant’s family is reunited in the United States, his wife’s India-based business has 
been liquated and the related bank accounts closed. Accordingly, the foreign influence 
                                                          
11 See AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (f). 
 
 
6 
 
concerns raised by these relationships and financial interests are mitigated. The 
concerns involving Applicant’s remaining familial ties are mitigated as well. Applicant’s 
relationships with his siblings cannot be considered casual, but neither of his siblings 
hold positions or engage in activities that could place Applicant in a position of having to 
choose between his foreign relatives and U.S. interests. In addition to his family 
members, Applicant maintains social contracts with former schoolmates who are 
residents and citizen of India. However, these contacts, which are not alleged with any 
specificity, are so infrequent that these relationships could not a create a risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation.12 
  
 The concerns raised by Applicant’s substantial financial interests in India are also 
mitigated. Applicant acquired the properties before he became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
and before he required national security eligibility. The income generated by these 
assets are not necessary to Applicant’s daily maintenance, nor does he require the 
Indian assets to comfortably provide financial assistance, when needed, to his Indian 
relatives. Given Applicant’s annual household income, his total U.S.-based assets, as 
well as his regular and candid disclosure of them to the U.S. Government, it is unlikely 
that his Indian assets could be effectively used to influence, manipulate, or pressure 
him.13 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the whole-
person factors in AG ¶ 2(d). In mitigating the foreign influence concerns, Applicant has 
demonstrated that he understands the importance of disclosing foreign contacts and 
financial interests. In the years he has held public trust eligibility, he complied with 
reporting requirements established by his employer and government client. I am 
satisfied that he will continue to handle these reporting requirements properly as a 
clearance holder. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
12 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and  8(c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 8(f). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
