 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04154 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Personal 
conduct concerns were not established. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are 
the same using either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 6, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 29, 2016. The evidence 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 2-7 (Item 1 includes pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on August 
18, 2016. Applicant submitted documents (AE A) in response to the FORM, which were 
received on October 31, 2016 (this submission was a copy of his previous answer and 
the Government’s FORM submission--Items 1 and 2). AE A is admitted into evidence 
without objection. Items 2-7 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations in his answer to the SOR. After a careful 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 65 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since June 
1993. He is a widower, his wife having passed away in 2008. They were married over 
36 years. He has one adult son. He retired from the Army after 22 years of honorable 
service (1971-1993). He graduated from high school and has taken some college 
courses.2  
  
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts totaling approximately $72,093, two tax 
liens, one state and one federal, both in the amount of $1,103, and a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy filed in May 2011 with a resulting discharge in February 2014. The SOR also 
alleges Applicant falsely answered three questions about his finances on his June 2014 
security clearance application. He answered “no” to a question asking if he failed to pay 
his federal or state taxes within the past seven years. He answered “no” to a question 
asking if he had a lien placed against his property for failing to pay taxes in the past 
seven years. He also answered “no” to a question asking if he was 120 days delinquent 
on any debt.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began after his wife passed away in 2008. She 
was always responsible for taking care of their finances. When she passed on, 
Applicant found it too difficult to handle those duties and got several months behind on 
his debts. This led to him not paying his state and federal income taxes for 2009. A lien 
was filed, but Applicant paid the amount owed to both the state and IRS and the liens 
were released in 2012, long before the issuance of the SOR.4  
 
 
                                                          
2 Items 2-3. 
 
3 Items 3, 5-7. 
 
4 Items 3, 5-7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant contends that the two delinquent debts (a home equity debt for $48,847 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and a car loan for $23,246 (SOR ¶ 1.b)) are both current. He claims that he 
stopped paying on the home equity account for some time, but has since resumed 
monthly payments in the amount of $243. A credit report from November 2015 shows 
this account as charged off (no charged-off date indicated). The date of first delinquency 
was January 2011. The date of last payment was November 2013. A later credit report 
(same credit reporting service), from July 2016, does not list the debt. This debt was 
included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was fully administered in February 
2014. His most recent credit report shows that he is current on his mortgage. This debt 
is resolved.5  
 
 The auto debt was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The debt no 
longer appears on Applicant’s last two credit reports after the bankruptcy. This debt is 
resolved.6 
 
 In May 2011, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and completed 
all the plan requirements resulting in his discharge in February 2014. Applicant was 
required to make monthly plan payments, which he did for 33 months. He paid a total of 
approximately $30,735 over that period of time. He is current on his car payment. He 
has no new delinquent debts.7  
 
 Applicant listed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in his security clearance application. 
He also admitted using a company credit card for personal use. He discussed all his 
debts with a defense investigator in July 2014.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 Items 3-4, 6-7. 
 
6 Items 4, 6-7. 
 
7 Items 4, 7. 
 
8 Items 2-3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
5 
 
 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts and taxes that were unpaid or unresolved. I find 
all disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s wife passed away in 2008 causing him to be ill equipped, literally and 
emotionally, to handle his financial responsibilities. After some time, he gathered himself 
and paid his delinquent tax debt, which released the liens. He also completed 33 
months of payments under his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He is making his current 
mortgage and car payments. I find AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
 
6 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant admitted his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in his security clearance 
application. He also admitted using a company credit card for personal use. Those 
admissions lend corroboration to his unintentional mistake of failing to affirmatively 
declare his tax liens (which were paid by this time) and his delinquent debt. Someone 
who is trying to deceive the Government about their finances would not list the 
information Applicant provided. I find that any omission by Applicant was unintentional. 
Personal conduct concerns are not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered his honorable military 
 
7 
 
 
service and his wife’s death. Applicant established a reliable track record of financial 
stability by making 33 months’ worth of bankruptcy payments, incurring no new 
delinquent debts, and making consistent mortgage and car payments.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Personal conduct concerns were not established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
