 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08684 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on May 25, 
2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2016. After coordinating with the 
parties, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on August 23, 2016, scheduling the hearing for October 6, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and 7 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. The objection to GE 6 was sustained. Applicant indicated 
that he had not received copies of the Government’s exhibits. He was provided a copy 
of GE 1 through 7, and his request for a continuance was granted. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued another notice of hearing on June 20, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for July 20, 2017. The hearing was reconvened as scheduled. Applicant 
withdrew his objection to GE 6, and it was admitted. GE 8 was admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcripts (Tr.1 and Tr.2) on 
November 30, 2016, and July 28, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 65-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer, or a predecessor contractor, since 1996. He served on active duty 
in the U.S. military from 1973 until he retired with an honorable discharge in 1993. He 
attended college for a period without earning a degree. He is married with three adult 
children.1 
 
Applicant is an enthusiast of a certain car model. He bought a new one every few 
years. Credit reports show that car loans of more than $30,000 were initiated in 2003, 
2005, and 2007. He refinanced his mortgage loans several times to help him pay the 
car loans. Eventually, he was unable to pay his mortgage loan, and he could not 
refinance it again or sell his home because of the collapse of the real estate market.2  
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in April 2009. Under Schedule D, 
Creditors Holding Secured Claims, the petition listed auto loans of $32,852 and 
$16,008, and a $197,499 mortgage loan with the value of the property listed as 
$125,000. There were no claims under Schedule E, Creditors Holding Unsecured 
Priority Claims. Under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the 
petition listed debts totaling $14,106. The case was converted to a Chapter 7 case in 
June 2011. Applicant’s dischargeable debts were discharged in September 2011.3  
 
Applicant’s financial problems did not end with his bankruptcy. Applicant did not 
file his 2009 through 2012 federal income tax returns when they were due. The IRS 
garnished his wages in about 2013 or 2014 to recover about $18,000 in back taxes, 
penalties, and interest. Applicant stated that he filed his delinquent returns in 2013, 
which lowered the amount owed, and the remaining taxes were paid through the 
garnishment.4  
 
Applicant helped his daughter buy a car in 2012. He testified that he cosigned the 
loan on the car. The credit reports list the loan as solely in Applicant’s name. In either 
event, his daughter was supposed to pay the loan, but did not. The creditor charged off 
the loan leaving a balance of more than $6,000 (SOR ¶ 1.d). Applicant knows he is 
                                                          
1 Tr.2 at 15, 33; GE 1, 6.  
 
2 Tr.2 at 15-16; GE 2-4, 6.  
 
3 Tr.2 at 14-16; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-8.  
 
4 Tr.2 at 29-31, 38-40; GE 6.  
 
 
3 
 
legally obligated to pay the debt, but he refuses to do so because he thinks his daughter 
should pay it.5 
 
Applicant bought another of his favorite-model cars in 2012. He testified that he 
paid about $32,000 for the car. The credit reports indicate a high credit on the loan as 
$43,504. Applicant stopped paying the car loan when the IRS was garnishing his 
wages. The car was repossessed leaving a deficiency balance, which was charged off. 
The most recent credit report shows a balance of $8,029 (SOR ¶ 1.g).6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges an $11,582 delinquent debt owed to a landlord organization. 
Applicant admitted renting a property, but he denied owing the amount alleged. The 
debt is reported by Experian on the May 2015 combined credit report. It is not listed on 
the 2016 and 2017 Equifax credit reports.7  
 
An $87 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) is reported by Experian on the May 2015 
combined credit report. It is not listed on the 2016 and 2017 Equifax credit reports.8  
 
Applicant stated that his finances are good. If he received financial counseling as 
a requirement of his bankruptcy case it did not have much of an impact on him because 
he testified that he did not receive financial counseling. He bought another car in 2016. 
The credit reports indicate the high credit as $31,148, with $615 monthly payments for 
72 months. He is current on the car loan.9 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
May 2015. He reported his bankruptcy case and the defaulted loan for his daughter’s 
car. He did not report his tax issues.10 I find that any failure to report his tax issues on 
the SF 86 or initially during his background interview was unintentional and not 
designed to mislead the DOD about his finances.  
 
 Applicant submitted his 2017 performance appraisal. It reflects that Applicant’s 
job performance was exceptional.11  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr.2 at 17-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4, 6-8.  
 
6 Tr.2 at 24-26; GE 2-4, 6-8.  
 
7 Tr.2 at 21-23; GE 2-4, 6-8.  
 
8 Tr.2 at 23-24; GE 2-4, 7, 8.  
 
9 Tr.2 at 33-34; GE 2-4, 7, 8.  
 
10 Tr.2 at 31-32; GE 1, 6.  
 
11 AE A.  
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems including a bankruptcy petition, late 
tax returns, unpaid taxes, and repossessed vehicles. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleges that Applicant owes $33,755 for the balance due on a car loan 
after the car was repossessed. The Government established that the amount owed is 
$8,029. The greater amount is found for Applicant, leaving the lesser amount owed of 
$8,029.  
 
 The $87 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) does not generate security concerns. SOR ¶ 
1.f is concluded for Applicant.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s love of a certain car model led to his financial problems. He 
refinanced his mortgage loans several times to help him pay the car loans. Eventually, 
he was unable to pay his mortgage loan, and he could not refinance it again or sell his 
home because of the collapse of the real estate market. He resorted to bankruptcy as a 
means of addressing his finances.  
 
Bankruptcy did not end his financial problems. He did not file his federal tax 
returns on time, and the IRS had to garnish his wages. Failure to comply with tax laws 
suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established government 
rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. See e.g. ISCR Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 
27, 2016). 
 
Applicant’s fascination with the model car did not end, as he bought another one 
in 2012. That car and his daughter’s car were repossessed, with Applicant making no 
effort to pay the deficiency balances.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
 
7 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and  
20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the disputed debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e. AG ¶ 20(g) is applicable, but it does not completely mitigate the judgment issues 
raised by Applicant’s failure to comply with the tax laws. I find that financial 
considerations concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
  
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SF 86 or during his 
background interview. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) have not been established. SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b are concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his exceptional job 
performance. However, he disregarded his tax obligations for several years, and he has 
a history of financial problems that appear to be mostly related to his love of a certain 
car.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant (in the amount 
of $8,029) 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
