 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-01847 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant is repaying his past-due taxes and has resolved three other delinquent 
debts to the same credit card company. His request to be eligible for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified 
information as required for his job with a defense contractor. During his background 
investigation, a government investigator interviewed Applicant on July 15 and 18, 2014. 
After reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) 
 
2 
 
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information.1 
 
On February 20, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts 
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 
At the time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my decision 
in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On May 2, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 9, 2016, and he had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM. Applicant timely responded to 
the FORM and provided additional documents in support of his response.  
 
 I received the case on June 1, 2017. Because the record had closed nearly a 
year beforehand, I re-opened the record on June 2, 2017 to allow the parties to update 
the information presented in the FORM and Applicant’s response thereto.5 This case 
was ready for decision on June 6, 2017, after I received submissions from Department 
Counsel and Applicant.6 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $48,682 in unpaid 
taxes, which the IRS is enforcing through tax liens against Applicant since 2013 (SOR 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.e); and that Applicant owes the same creditor $4,430 for three delinquent 
credit card accounts (SOR 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f). Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations and provided information showing he paid the credit card accounts, and that 
he had a payment plan with the IRS to satisfy his tax debts. In addition to the facts 
established by Applicant’s Answer, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since February 2014. He previously worked in the IT department of a 
construction company from 1993 until corporate downsizing eliminated his job in late 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on eight enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 8). 
5 See Order of Administrative Judge, dated June 2, 2017, included as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 
 
6 Department Counsel submitted a credit report dated June 5, 2017, as FORM Item 9. Applicant 
submitted a one-page statement dated June 6, 2017, augmenting his earlier response to the FORM. 
 
3 
 
2013. A four-month period of unemployment preceded his current position. Applicant 
and his wife have been married since May 1981 and have three adult children. (FORM, 
Item 4) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he disclosed that he had not paid his 
federal income taxes for 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012. The IRS is enforcing 
Applicant’s federal tax debts through the three tax liens alleged at SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 
1.e. Applicant incurred his tax debts after several years of underpaying his taxes each 
year because he was not filing correctly. Subsequently, he did not have enough money 
to pay the balance due with his annual tax returns. In about 2006, he retained a tax 
advocacy company to help him resolve his tax problems, but that company turned out to 
be disreputable and took his money without taking any action for him. Thereafter, 
Applicant was overwhelmed and for several years took no action to resolve his tax 
problems. 
 
 In 2011, Applicant retained another tax resolution firm. In July 2014, when a 
Government investigator interviewed Applicant for his clearance, Applicant stated he 
had established a repayment plan with the IRS and was paying $579 each month on his 
tax debt. In his e-QIP and in his responses to the SOR and FORM, Applicant again 
claimed he was making monthly payments of $579 to the IRS. Applicant’s SOR Answer 
contains a copy of his monthly installment agreement payment due as of February 17, 
2016. It also shows his total tax debt at that point had fallen from just over $48,000 to 
just over $40,000. Credit reports submitted by the Government in the FORM and in 
response to my order re-opening the record show two of the three IRS liens against 
Applicant are still in place. (FORM, Items 2, 4, 8, and 9)  
 
 Applicant also owed at least $20,000 in past-due credit card debts to the creditor 
listed in SOR 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f. Applicant’s Answer, along with a credit report submitted 
by the Government on June 5, 2017, established that Applicant satisfied these debts in 
2011. (Response to FORM; FORM, Items 2, 4, 8, and 9) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
                                                 
7 Directive. 6.3. 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
4 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to classified information. A security clearance decision is intended only to 
resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant 
to either receive or continue to have access to classified information. Department 
Counsel must produce sufficient reliable information on which DOD based its 
preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. 
Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted facts alleged in the 
SOR.9 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.10  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a 
heavy burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest for them to have access to protected information.11 A person 
who has access to such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to 
ensure each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s interests as his or her own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.12 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s tax and credit card debts 
reasonably raised the security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial 
                                                 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
9 Directive, E3.1.14. 
10 Directive, E3.1.15. 
11 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
12 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a 
possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern 
such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence 
that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, 
including espionage. 
 
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the following 
AG ¶ 19 disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
Although he filed his tax returns as required, Applicant failed to pay the balance 
of taxes due with those returns. He also incurred significant delinquent credit card debt. 
His tax debts and credit card debts were enforced by liens against him. 
 
 By contrast, the record evidence as a whole supports application of the following 
AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 (g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
 Applicant established in his response to the SOR that he had resolved his credit 
card debts as early as 2011. Available information about his tax repayment efforts 
shows he is engaged in a repayment plan with the IRS and that he has paid off one of 
the liens against him so far. The record on this issue tends to support his claim that he 
has been trying to resolve his taxes and other financial issues for the past few years. On 
balance, I conclude the security concerns raised by Applicant’s outstanding debts are 
mitigated.  
  
 
6 
 
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in 
the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Available information 
shows Applicant has been addressing his financial problems in a reasonable way 
and that he is unlikely to experience a recurrence of his past financial problems. 
A fair and commonsense assessment of this record shows that the security 
concerns expressed through the SOR are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by 
section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a  - 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
