1 
-            
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-07772 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
       Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 12, 2015. 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations and he elected to have his case decided on the written record. He also 
attached a one-page statement.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 27, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on August 30, 2016, and had 
30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided no response to 
the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 6, is admitted into 
evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on September 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He graduated from high school in 2001, and enlisted in 
the U.S. Army. However, he could not pass the entry physical and received a discharge 
in October 2001 because he couldn’t start basic training. Applicant has been employed 
as an antenna technician for a federal contractor since September 2008. He has never 
married and he reports no children.  
 
He disclosed some of his delinquent debts in section 26 of his March 2015 SCA, 
and explained that he only became aware of his credit reports and debts when he 
started the SCA process. He had not made payments on some of his delinquent debts 
since 2009. He also claimed to have contacted a consumer-credit-counseling firm to 
consolidate his delinquent debts and start a payment plan of $711 per month, for 30 
months. In his SCA, Applicant stated his intent to pay these debts in full. However, he 
has produced no evidence of the plan or any track record of actual payments in 
accordance with the plan. 
 
The SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,000 for 
general credit card and consumer debt. Applicant admitted to these delinquent debts in 
his Answer to the SOR. In a one-page handwritten statement attached to his Answer, 
Applicant stated that some of the smaller debts resulted from his forgetting to pay due to 
being gone so often for work. “These can be paid in these coming weeks. The larger 
ones are from several years ago. Those can be paid after hopefully receiving my 
clearance . . . .” In his clearance interview, Applicant explained that most of these 
alleged delinquent debts resulted from revolving-credit-card accounts that he opened 
before 2009. He could not make payments on these numerous credit cards due to a 
lack of income. SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f and 1.g all relate to credit card debts that were 
placed for collection. SOR ¶ 1.c was for a personal loan that Applicant took out, and it 
was charged-off in the amount of $330.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s March 12, 2015 
security clearance application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on August 10, 
2015.  
 
 
3 
 
 
When confronted by the clearance interviewer, in each instance, Applicant stated 
that he had ignored postal correspondence from the creditors, and he intended to 
contact the collection agencies to pay these off by the end of 2015. However, he has 
produced no documents to demonstrate that he followed through. Applicant also stated 
in his clearance interview that he used the credit-counseling agency only for payments 
of $730 in May 2015, and $740 in June 2015.3 Then, he stopped making payments 
when he realized that he would be better to pay the creditors directly himself. However, 
Applicant submitted no documentary evidence to demonstrate that he actually made 
payments directly to the creditors.  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
3 Item 4, p. 6. 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
 
5 
 
 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.4 Applicant has not met that burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has been employed continuously since 2008. He has provided no 
explanation for his inability or unwillingness to pay his delinquent debts, other than a 
lack of income. He has not established any conditions that were beyond his control. 
Moreover, he has not produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not met his burden to 
provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and 
that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He 
claims to have made previous payments to the credit-counseling firm in May and June 
2015, pursuant to a plan, but produced no substantiating documents. The one charged-
off debt has not been resolved. The seven delinquent debts have not been resolved. 
The mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Most importantly, Applicant has not 
addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:             Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
