 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03610 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jim Green, Esquire, J. Green Group 
 
 
September 7, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 28, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on July 19, 2016.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 15, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for September 15, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  The Government offered seven exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 
1 through 7, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant offered thirteen 
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through M, which were admitted without 
 
2 
 
objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of 
business until September 27, 2016.  Applicant submitted one Post Hearing Exhibit, 
referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.  Applicant’s Post Hearing Exhibit was 
admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
September 21, 2016. 
 
 The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He is married a second time, and has one son.  He has 
a Bachelor’s degree in Medical Technology.  He is employed with a defense contractor 
as an Instructor for the U.S. Navy.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified the fact that the Applicant has five delinquent debts.  Applicant admitted each 
of the allegations in the SOR.  (See Answer)    
 
 Applicant was born in the Philippines.  His family returned to the United States 
when he was a baby.  He lived in the United States for 11 years and then moved back 
to the Philippines with his family.  Applicant attended middle school, high school, and 
then college in the Philippines, where he obtained a Bachelor’s degree.  In 1996, 
Applicant returned to the United States.  He joined the U.S. Navy in 1997, where he 
served honorably for ten years until 2008.  He began his employment with a defense 
contractor, as a civilian, two days after retiring in 2008.  He has held a security 
clearance during his military career and throughout his civilian employment.   
 
 Among other things, Applicant is a real estate investor.  In 2006, he strategically 
defaulted on a rental property in the United States because it became a bad business 
 
3 
 
investment.  The majority of the debts listed in the SOR are related to the strategic 
default, and became delinquent and owing: 
 
 1(a) In 2006, Applicant purchased a rental property for investment purposes.  In 
the beginning he was receiving enough rent to cover the mortgage cost.  By 2009, the 
rental market became more difficult, and he could not find a renter.  There was damage 
to the property, and Applicant decided that he could not afford to continue to maintain 
the property and pay the mortgage without a renter.  Applicant stopped paying the 
mortgage, and allowed the house to be foreclosed upon in 2015.  Applicant received a 
letter from the lender dated May 30, 2013, indicating that they have agreed to forgive all 
of the balance on his first mortgage lien in the amount of $150,239.09.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit M.)  That same month, Applicant purchases another property in the Philippines.   
       
 1(b) A debt to the city for an account placed for collection in the amount of $28 
has been paid.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  This was a fix-it ticket Applicant received for 
having tint on his front car windows.   
 
 1(c) A debt to Navy Federal Credit Union on a home equity loan account was 120 
days or more past due in the approximate amount of $4,326 with a principal balance of 
$51,089.  Applicant explained that he used these funds to compensate his ex-wife 
during their divorce settlement.  (Tr. p. 37.)  This loan pertains to Applicant’s primary 
residence at the time.  As a result of the divorce, he eventually had to short sale the 
property.  Since 2009, Applicant has been making payments of $75 monthly toward the 
payment of the debt which was agreed upon by the lender.  At this point, Applicant has 
reduced the debt to about $3,975.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and Tr. p. 39.)   
 
 1(d) and 1(e) A debt owed to a CLC CONSUMER/DITECH on a home equity 
loan account was charged off in the approximate amount of $18,962.  Applicant 
explained that this was the second lien on the rental property that was foreclosed upon 
in allegation 1(a) of the SOR.  This equity loan or second mortgage was originally for 
$25,000 and was sold to another lender which is NLO Funding, the same lender set 
forth in allegation 1(d) of the SOR.  (Tr. p. 42.)  When the rental house was sold by the 
lender holding the first lien, about $20,000 was used to pay the second lien holder.  He 
states that after the proceeds were used to pay down the second, Applicant believes 
that he owes about $27,000 which include later fees, reasonable attorney fees, costs, 
election demands, receivership and the like.  Applicant states that he has not been 
contacted by the lender, but has reached out to their attorneys.  Applicant was informed 
by e-mail that the lender has no intention of pursuing the collection account.  Applicant 
is willing and capable of paying the debt if the lender contacted him and told him to do 
so.  (Tr. pp. 45-46.)    
 
 Applicant testified that his current total monthly income is $5,300. His total 
monthly expenses are about $4,400.  He provided a month budget.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
C.)  He is able to build a savings.  In 2011, when his mother died, Applicant inherited 
significant property in the Philippines which includes a five unit apartment building in the 
Philippines worth $50,000; a parcel of land in the Philippines worth $30,000; and a 
single family home in the Philippines worth $60,000.  (Tr. p. 52.)  He also purchased a 
 
4 
 
house in the Philippines for $80,000.  His assets in the Philippines are worth 
approximately $230,000.  (Tr. p. 54.) 
 
 Applicant admitted that he made a strategic business decision not to pay the 
mortgage on the rental property in the United States, when the housing market 
declined.  The property had damage and was difficult to rent.  Applicant admitted that he 
could have afforded to pay the mortgage on this rental property instead of allowing it to 
be was foreclosed upon.  Applicant obviously had plenty of assets in the Philippines 
worth between $250,000 and $300,000 and he sold a home in the United States in 2011 
and received profits of about $60,000.  Any of those profits could have been used to pay 
the mortgage on the rental property in 1(a) of the SOR.  However, that was not the 
business decision he made.  Applicant also testified that since his mother died in 2011, 
when he inherited the properties, he has been trying to sell them and has had them on 
the market with a realtor.  Since the downturn in the real estate market, there have been 
no buyers for the property.  Applicant states that from all of his properties in the 
Philippines, Applicant receives a total of about $500 monthly.  Since 2013, he has been 
using that profit to purchase another property in the Philippines.   
  
 Applicant further testified that he, his wife, and a childhood friend, are currently 
trying to set up a construction business in the Philippines.  They began the business in 
2010 which provides maintenance and build-out services for buildings.  Applicant has 
not discussed this business with his employer. 
 
 Numerous letters of recommendation from his supervisor, professional 
colleagues, coworkers, and friends attest to Applicant’s outstanding work performance 
as an exceptional instructor and mentor, as well as his commitment and dedication to 
excellence, his professionalism and his ability to complete all tasks with skill and pride.  
Applicant is further described as respectful of privacy, classified information, and rules 
and restrictions.  He is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibits D, 
E, F, G, H, I, J, K, and L.)     
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
 
5 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
         Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
 
6 
 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so, and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
  Applicant is a real estate investor who strategically allowed a rental property in 
the United States to be foreclosed upon because it became a bad business investment.  
Applicant had the money and or the assets available to pay the mortgage, but instead, 
for his benefit, he intentionally and deliberately allowed it to be foreclosed upon.  The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 19 (b), (c) and (d) 
are applicable here. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgement; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant was remarkably relieved off his financial obligation in relation to the 
foreclosed rental property without understanding why.  He is making regular monthly 
payments toward his line of credit.  He has either paid or is satisfying his other creditors.  
However, it cannot be said that he has addressed his financial indebtedness in a 
reasonable and responsible manner.  AG ¶ 20(a) and (b) were considered.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has proudly served our country in 
the Navy.  In his civilian position, he has worked hard to exemplify dedication and 
commitment to his job for the defense department.  He has the trust and respect from 
his professional colleagues, management, coworkers, and friends.       
 
However, Applicant strategically allowed his rental property to be foreclosed 
upon so he did not have to continue to pay the lender as agreed.  As a result, the lender 
holding the first mortgage, and the lender holding the second mortgage were not paid 
under the contract.  At best, Applicant can be considered lucky to be relieves of his 
financial obligation pertaining to the first mortgage, but he cannot be said to have shown 
good judgment as it would relate to his moral character, reliability and trustworthiness.  
He intentionally committed a breach of contract and a breach of trust.  Strategic defaults 
are looked upon unfavorably by the DoD.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
