1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
           ------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 15-08566 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant mitigated the security concern raised by his 
problematic financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on June 25, 2015. This document is commonly known as a security 
clearance application. On August 20, 2016, after reviewing the application and the 
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant his eligibility for access to classified information.1 It detailed the factual reasons for 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
2 
 
the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 23, 2016, and requested a decision based 
on the written record without a hearing.   
 
On October 27, 2016, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant material  
(FORM).2 The FORM was mailed to Applicant on the same date. He was given 30 days  
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on November 4, 2016.3 Applicant  responded to 
the FORM on December 5, 2016. The documents submitted by Applicant in response are 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibit A (AE) and are admitted into evidence without objection.4 
The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence, which are marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5.5 Exhibits 1 and 3 through 5 are admitted into 
evidence without objection. GE 2 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the November 2015 background investigation. 
The ROI is not authenticated, as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.6 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. The footnote is prominently prefaced with a bolded, upper-case notice to 
Applicant and flagging for Applicant the importance of the footnote, which then explains 
the concepts of authentication and waiver. In a case such as this, where Applicant has 
responded to the FORM, it is fair to conclude that Applicant read the footnote, understood 
it, and chose not to object to GE 2. GE 2 is, therefore, admitted into evidence.   
                                                          
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the Federal 
Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued under 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My Decision and 
Formal Findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guideline F.  
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, 
some of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision.  
 
3 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals’ (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated October 27, 2016, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated November 4, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after receiving it to submit information.   
 
4 AE is comprised of a cover letter and 14 sets of tabbed documents, which I will refer to as AE, Tab # __.  
 
5 The first item in the FORM is the SOR and Applicant’s Answer. Because the SOR and the Answer are the 
pleadings in this case, they are not marked as Exhibits. Items 2 through 6 are marked as Exhibits 1 through 
5.  
 
6 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process in security clearance cases. Judge Ra’anan raises a number 
of pertinent questions about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old and holds two Associate’s degrees. He has never married 
and has no children. He served in the U.S. Air Force on active duty from March 1986 until 
being honorably discharged in November 1999. Since June 2015 he has been employed 
as a business analyst for a defense contractor.7 
 
The SOR alleged eight delinquent debts totaling $26,311 and a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy filing in June 2002 that was discharged in September 2002. Applicant admits 
all of the SOR allegations with explanations. He explained that in October 2012 he was 
laid off by his employer when the federal government contract he was supporting ended, 
and his employer did not have another position available for Applicant. He managed to 
get by financially for about six months using unemployment compensation and his 
savings. He then had to borrow from his family to pay his household bills. Next, he moved 
to a state where the cost of living was much lower. He cashed out his retirement account 
to make ends meet. In July 2015 he was rehired by the company that laid him off in 2012, 
where he works today.8  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation showing that he has 
resolved, either by payments or by payment agreements, five of the SOR debts.9 In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant provided documentation that he has resolved, either by 
payments or payment agreements, the other three SOR debts.10 
  
Law and Policies 
 
 It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.11 As noted 
by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”12 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about 
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved 
in favor of protecting national security.  
 
                                                          
7 GE 1.  
 
8 Answer, p. 1.  
 
9 Answer, pp. 2-3 and pp. c.1 through 1.h.3. Those SOR debts are ¶¶ 1.c, e through h.  
 
10 AE, cover letter page 7 and Tabs #12-14. Those SOR debts are ¶¶ 1.a, b, and d.   
 
11 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance).  
 
12 484 U.S. at 531 
 
4 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.13 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.14 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.15 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.16 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.17 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.18 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.19 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and 
a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.20 
 
     Discussion 
  
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,21 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information.22 
 
                                                          
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
14 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
18 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
21 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
22 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions: 
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
history going back to 2012. This raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  The 
next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply. 
 
In October 2012, Applicant was laid off when the government contract he was 
supporting ended, and his employer did not have another position available for Applicant. 
Applicant used unemployment compensation, savings, cashing out his retirement fund, 
and loans from his family to survive financially, until he was rehired by his former 
employer. During his lengthy period of unemployment, Applicant even relocated to 
another state where the cost of living was lower. I find that Applicant’s job loss was a 
circumstance beyond his control. I also find that in facing his adverse circumstances, 
Applicant acted responsibly during his period of unemployment and subsequent to his 
rehiring by initiating good-faith efforts to pay his overdue creditors. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) 
apply.23  
 
   The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
                                                          
23 Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed 15 years ago does not raise a security concern. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies.  
6 
 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.24 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the SOR allegations: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:                   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
24 AG ¶¶ 2(d)(1)-(9) and 2(f)(1)-(6).  
 
