 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06443 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate concerns related to her history of illegal drug use and purchase. She also failed 
to mitigate the concerns related to her intentional falsification of a 2006 security 
clearance.  Although Applicant did not knowingly use illegal drugs after being granted a 
security clearance, she did use illegal drugs while employed in public safety and law 
enforcement positions. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to deny her security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 6, 2016. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She received 
the FORM on April 15, 2016, and did not respond. The documents appended to the 
FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 30, has worked for her employer, a federal contractor, since April 
2015. She completed a security clearance application that month, disclosing the use 
and purchase of cocaine between August 2006 and December 2014. Applicant was 
initially granted a security clearance in October 2007, after a 2006 background 
investigation. She did not disclose any illegal drug use. The SOR alleges, under the 
drug involvement guideline, Applicant’s history of illegal drug use and purchase (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) between August 2006 and December 2014,  and her continued use of 
illegal drugs after being granted and while having an active security clearance (SOR ¶ 
1.c). Applicant’s drug history is also cross-alleged under the personal conduct guideline 
(SOR ¶ 2.a), in addition to an allegation that she intentionally falsified her August 2006 
security clearance application by failing to disclose her illegal drug use (SOR ¶ 2.b).3  
 
 In May 2015, a background investigator interviewed Applicant about her illegal 
drug use. Applicant stated that she only used illegal drugs, which she purchased from 
former high school classmates, at home by herself. Contrary to the disclosure on her 
April 2015 security clearance application, Applicant did not participate in substance 
abuse counseling. She clarified that she stopped using illegal drugs after receiving 
encouragement from friends to live a cleaner life.4  
 
 Applicant offered a different explanation of her drug use in her answer to the 
SOR. After reviewing unspecified personal records, Applicant changed her dates of 
illegal drug use. She explained that the dates she provided on her 2015 security 
clearance application were mistaken. Applicant now reports that she used drugs only 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 3 - 4. 
 
4 GE 3, 6.  
 
3 
 
between 2008 and 2012, when she was involved in a romantic relationship with another 
drug user. When the relationship ended, so did Applicant’s use of illegal drugs.5  
 
 The record also contains information about Applicant’s security clearance history. 
Applicant completed her first security clearance application in 2006 in connection with 
the Air Force Delayed Entry program in 2006. Applicant indicated that she reported to 
boot camp in January 2007 and received a medical discharge two weeks later. The 
record does not contain any information to verify Applicant’s dates of service and she 
did not disclose any military service on her 2015 security clearance application. Records 
from the Joint Personnel Adjudication System show that Applicant was granted a 
security clearance in October 2007, months after her purported discharge from the 
military.  
 
Applicant held eight jobs between February 2007 and April 2014. There is no 
record evidence that any required national security eligibility. During that time, however, 
Applicant worked as a school bus driver (February 2007 to August 2009), a correctional 
officer at a state prison (August 2009 to February 2011), and as a ramp agent at an 
airport (November 2012 to January 2013). Applicant disclosed that she was investigated 
by the Department of Homeland Security for a security clearance. She did not provide 
any other details about that adjudication.6  
 
 Applicant acknowledges that her use of illegal drugs shows a serious lapse in 
judgment. However, she claims to have taken steps to reduce the likelihood of future 
use. She no longer associates with drug users, ending those relationships by changing 
her phone number and moving to another city. Applicant states that she is more 
discerning about her friendships. She has gone to college, obtaining an associate’s 
degree in August 2013, and is now working on her bachelor’s degree.7 
 
 Applicant believes that she is trustworthy and reliable. Applicant claims that she 
does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future and has indicated a willingness to sign 
a statement of intent with automatic revocation for any future use.  However, she did not 
provide a signed statement in response to the SOR or the FORM.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 GE 2. 
 
6 GE 3-4, 6. 
 
7 GE 2-3.  
 
8 GE 2.  
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
 The record establishes a prima facie case under the drug involvement and 
personal conduct guidelines. Applicant admits substance misuse as well as possession 
and purchase of an illegal drug.9  The record does not support the allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.c that Applicant used illegal drugs after being granted and while possessing an active 
security clearance. While the allegation may be factually correct, the record does not 
establish that the Applicant knew of the favorable adjudication or that she was working 
in a position that required national security eligibility. Even though SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved 
                                                          
9 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). 
 
5 
 
in Applicant’s favor, the underlying concerns about her history of illegal drug use remain 
and are not mitigated by the passage of time or her claims that future use is unlikely to 
recur.10 Applicant’s drug use is sufficient for disqualification under the drug involvement 
guideline alone. However, the circumstances of Applicant’s illegal drug use raises 
personal conduct concerns, supporting a negative whole-person assessment, indicating 
questionable judgment, a disregard for the law, and an unwillingness to follow rules and 
regulation. For years, Applicant used of illegal drugs while employed in public safety 
and law enforcement positions. She did not provide any evidence to mitigate this 
conduct.  
 
 In addition to her history of illegal drug use, the record also shows that Applicant 
has a history of lying to the Government about it. She intentionally falsified her 2006 
security clearance application by failing to disclose her contemporaneous drug use.11 
The potential adverse consequences of reporting such adverse information in the 
months preceding boot camp is sufficient circumstantial evidence of her intent to 
mislead the Government. Applicant’s conflicting statements during the current 
adjudication are evidence of her ongoing efforts to mislead the government and show a 
pattern of dishonesty that cannot be ignored or mitigated.   
 
 Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d), which 
supports a negative whole person assessment. Applicant has demonstrated an  inability 
and unwillingness to abide by laws, rules, and regulations. She has also demonstrated 
that she is unreliable, untrustworthy, and unlikely to truthfully self-report derogatory 
information. Ultimately, these characteristics suggests that Applicant may not properly 
handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.b:      Against Applicant 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 24. 
 
11 AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
