 
 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05691 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 8, 2015. On 
April 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F.1 
Applicant responded to the SOR, submitted documentary evidence, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 13, 2016, and the hearing was convened 
on January 31, 2017. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. The Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to include allegation 
¶ 1.w, failure to file and pay 2015 Federal income taxes when due. The SOR was amended 
without objection. The record was held open to permit Applicant time to submit documentary 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
evidence in mitigation. She requested an enlargement of time to April 10, 2017, which was 
granted. No post-hearing information has been submitted. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on February 8, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor, employed since 2013. 
She received a bachelor’s degree in 2010 and honorably served in the U.S. Army from 1987 
to 2010, when she retired as a master sergeant. She was married in 1993 and divorced in 
2003. She remarried in 2010 and is now a widow. Applicant has two adult children.  
 
The SOR alleged Applicant twice filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The first case was 
filed with her first husband in 1999, and dismissed in 2000 while she was on active duty. 
She was unable to clearly articulate why the case was dismissed, but she relied on her 
husband to manage the family’s finances. 
 
She reported that her second husband was a retired military veteran who suffered 
from post-traumatic stress disorder. She stated that he was abusive, a substance abuser, 
and financially irresponsible. They began to experience financial difficulty in 2010, and 
Applicant’s financial problems have continued to the present. She received financial 
counseling in 2010 through the Army. The second bankruptcy was filed in 2012, and 
dismissed in 2013. The last case was filed to prevent Applicant from losing her home to 
foreclosure, but she was unsuccessful. Her spouse died in 2014. 
 
The SOR also alleged 19 delinquent accounts2 that have been placed for collections 
or have been charged off. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
1.e-1.i, 1.p-1.r, and 1.u-1.v. She was unsure about SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.c, 1.k-1.m, and 1.t. She 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.j, and 1.m-1.n. Applicant stated in her Answer that she arranged to pay or 
make installment payments on debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.i, and 1.p-1.r. She provided 
some documentary evidence of payment arrangements, but no evidence of payments or 
compliance with payment plans. The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.s (husband’s repossessed 
vehicle), has been satisfied. Applicant claimed in her answer and testimony to have disputed 
a mortgage deficiency, medical debts, and consumer debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.j-1.n, 1.t 
and 1.v. She did not provide evidence of her disputes, efforts to resolve the debts, or a 
recent credit report showing resolution of the accounts. Other debts to which she testified 
are paid or being paid through payment plans, were not supported with documentary 
evidence sufficient to show their current status. A document Applicant provided in her 
answer from a bank credit card showing the current status of an account, is not the same 
account as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u, which alleges a charged-off balance of $1,978. The debt 
remains unresolved. 
 
SOR allegation ¶ 1.w, failure to file and pay 2015 Federal income taxes when due, 
was added at the hearing to conform the SOR to the evidence. Applicant admitted the 
allegation, and confirmed that she did not file her 2015 tax return or pay taxes owed. She 
expressed concern that her tax preparer’s draft return showed that she owed more than she 
                                                     
2 The SOR lettering skipped ¶ 1.o. 
 
 
3 
 
expected. She contacted the IRS, and discussed filing her 2015 return with her 2016 return, 
and to request a payment plan at that time to repay overdue taxes. 
 
Applicant expressed her dedication to the soldiers she serves in her job and to a non-
profit group aiding veterans in abusive relationships. She was forthcoming in her testimony 
and fully discussed her debts and what she has done to address them. She has no savings 
or investments. She earns about $46,000 per year through her job, military retirement, and 
VA disability compensation. She did not provide a current financial statement or budget. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. My ultimate decision 
would be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to “control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President has 
authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access 
to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 
7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has 
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established 
for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from being 
eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial evidence” 
 
 
4 
 
is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area 
Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 
(App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive 
¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they 
must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems, including two failed Chapter 13 
bankruptcies. She has unfiled and unpaid Federal taxes, and other unresolved delinquent 
debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem  and  provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
No mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s financial condition may have resulted 
from a condition beyond her control, such as an abusive relationship, her husband’s 
financial irresponsibility and eventual death. However, Applicant has not shown that since 
her husband passed away in 2014, she has successfully regained control of her finances, 
or has acted responsibly with regard to her debts. By her testimony, she may have resolved 
some of the debts as she asserted, but she failed to provide any documentary evidence 
after the hearing, despite an opportunity to do so, of debt resolution, payments, or 
documented disputes. Without evidence showing her debts are being resolved and her 
current financial condition is sound, I am unable to find sufficient mitigation to convince me 
to grant or continue her national security eligibility. Applicant’s failure to file and pay her 
Federal income tax when due compounds her financial condition and reflects an 
unacceptable level of financial irresponsibility. The negative financial information contained 
 
 
6 
 
herein, especially with regard to delinquent tax obligations, significantly impacts Applicant’s 
judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial issues 
are being or will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, given her continued employment since 2013 and other 
sources of income. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. She sought some financial 
counseling, but it is unclear what aid was provided through counseling. Her current financial 
status casts doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment when it comes to 
financial decision-making. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigating information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity 
at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s marital history, 
military service, and service to veterans. However, for the reasons stated above, I am unable 
to find that she has appropriate control of her finances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n, 1.p-1.r, 1.t-1.w: Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.s: For Applicant
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
