 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 15-07285 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement; Guideline J, criminal conduct; Guideline E, personal conduct; or Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, Guideline F, financial considerations, 
Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was taken 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 31, 2016. He requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 6, 2016, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including 
documents identified as Items 1-9. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the FORM on October 17, 2016. He did not respond to the FORM. The SOR 
and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 9 are 
admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2017. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). The AGs became effective on June 8, 2017 for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date, including this one.4 Any changes resulting from the implementation of 
the new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.n, 2.a-2.h, 2.j, 2.k, 3.a, and 3.b, and provided a 
narrative statement. He denied SOR ¶ 2.i. He did not answer SOR ¶¶ 3.c, 3.d, or 4.a. 
Though they are all cross-allegations, I construe those answers as denials. His 
admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has never 
married. He has an eight-year old child. He has a high school diploma (2007) and one 
year of college. Before entering the defense industry, he held a variety of jobs in 
restaurants and in sales. He had several periods of unemployment (May 2010 to March 
2011; October 2012 to May 2014, and July 2014 to October 2014). He has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2014, and submitted a security clearance 
application (SCA) in connection with that employment. (Item 3) 
 
Guideline H and Guideline J 
 
 Applicant began using marijuana in 2006, when he was 15 years old. He used 
marijuana at least weekly, and often every other day, until October 2014. He spent up to 
$400 a month on marijuana. In 2011, Applicant began using and purchasing heroin. He 
smoked heroin every other day until about February 2014. (SOR ¶ 1.f) He became 
addicted to both heroin and marijuana. (Item 4) 
 
Between 2008 and October 2014, Applicant used and purchased numerous other 
illegal drugs, including cocaine (about 10 times at about age 18), methamphetamines 
(every other day between 2011 and October 2013), ecstasy (one time at age 20), and 
                                                          
4 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
 
3 
 
 
PCP (once at age 22). He also misused Percocet by taking more than the prescribed 
amount, at age 24. (SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i) 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug use caused him financial, criminal, and health problems. 
He acknowledged that his heroin use twice led to pneumonia. In December 2012, 
Applicant experienced withdrawal symptoms, and approached his parents for help. 
They sent him to an inpatient detoxification program, where he spent several days. 
(SOR ¶ 1.n)  The program provider recommended additional counseling and treatment, 
but Applicant did not go. (Item 4) 
 
To finance his drug habit, Applicant sold his own possessions and also stole 
money and valuables from his mother. (SOR ¶ 1.j) In April 2013, after he stole some of 
her jewelry, Applicant’s mother called the police and had him arrested. He was charged 
with misdemeanor theft-control property, felony second-degree trafficking in stolen 
property, and possession of drug paraphernalia. (SOR ¶ 1.d)  
  
 After Applicant agreed to enter inpatient drug treatment, his mother agreed not to 
press charges. He attended three months of inpatient drug counseling and treatment at 
a facility in another state, from April to June 2013. (SOR ¶ 1.m) He completed the 
program, but resumed using drugs again soon thereafter. (SOR ¶ 1.l) (Items 3, 4) 
 
 In late December 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of 
drug paraphernalia after the police found a marijuana pipe in his pocket during a traffic 
stop. (SOR ¶ 1.b) Applicant pleaded guilty and was ordered to attend six months of drug 
education classes. He was subsequently diagnosed with polysubstance and opioid 
dependence, amphetamine abuse, and cannabis abuse. (SOR ¶ 1.k)8 Applicant 
attended about five of the weekly classes, and then stopped going. A bench warrant 
was issued due to his non-compliance with the program. In July 2014, he was arrested 
during a traffic stop. (SOR ¶ 1.c) (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
Guideline E  
 
Applicant submitted his SCA in November 2014. He disclosed that he had used 
marijuana between April 2006 and January 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.e) He did not disclose any 
other illegal drug use, or his misuse of prescription drugs. Applicant disclosed his 
December 2013 arrest for possession of drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶ 1.b), but did not 
disclose his April 2013 arrest (SOR ¶ 1.d) because the charges were dropped. He 
disclosed his inpatient drug treatment from April to July 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.m) and his drug 
education classes (2013-2014) (SOR ¶ 1.k), but not his brief stay in drug detoxification 
in December 2012. (SOR ¶ 1.n) He did not disclose the full extent of his illegal drug use 
                                                          
8 It appears from Applicant’s background interviews that he was sent to this program after his December 
2013 arrest (and not in October 2013, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k). This program also appears to have 
involved drug education classes, rather than “drug treatment” as alleged in ¶ 1.k). I therefore think it more 
likely that Applicant’s medical diagnoses of drug dependence and drug abuse (also referenced in SOR ¶ 
1.k) actually occurred during the inpatient drug treatment program he attended between April and June 
2013. (SOR ¶ 1.m) There are no documents from either program in the record that might clarify this. 
 
4 
 
 
until his second background interview, in July 2015, when he stated that he thought he 
would not be granted a clearance if the full extent of his drug use became known. (Items 
3, 4) 
    
During that interview, in July 2015, Applicant disclosed that he had been charged 
the month before with: 1) driving under the influence of liquor/drugs/vapors, 2) driving 
under the influence of marijuana, and 3) possession of marijuana. (SOR ¶ 1.a) The 
incident leading to the charges occurred in August 2014, when Applicant was in a head-
on-collision. Applicant had only recently been informed of the charges. (Item 4) Later in 
July 2015, Applicant pleaded guilty to count 1, and the other two counts were 
dismissed. Court records indicate that Applicant served about two weeks in jail in July-
August 2015. (Items 2, 4, 7)  
 
With his answer, Applicant provided no documents concerning any of his prior 
drug treatments or education programs. He gave no indication that he was actively 
participating in any drug treatment, or a counseling or support group. He made no 
specific statement regarding his future intentions to remain sober and drug-free.  
 
Guideline F 
 
Applicant’s background investigation also included credit reports from January 
2015 and July 2015. Applicant had 11 delinquent accounts, totaling about $11,819. 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a ($6,104) and 2.h (191) are delinquent child support accounts.9 SOR ¶¶ 2.b 
($1,200), 2.f ($367), and 2.k ($459) are phone bills. SOR ¶ 2.c is a debt to a federal 
government entity ($953). SOR ¶¶ 2.d ($516), 2.e ($398), and 2.g ($272) are medical 
accounts. SOR ¶ 2.i is an $80 debt in collection, and SOR ¶ 2.j ($1,279) is a charged-off 
credit card account. Applicant admitted all the debts in the SOR but for ¶ 2.i, which he 
denied without an explanation. (Items 2, 8, 9)  
 
On his SCA, Applicant disclosed about $8,000 in child support debt. He stated 
that he got behind “when I wasn’t working” and “I’m paying what the court ordered.” 
(Item 3) As of September 2015, he owed about $6,200 on his two child support 
accounts. (Item 9) In his answer, Applicant indicated that he was paying $400 a month 
in child support, and that the delinquency was calculated to include “back pay when the 
support was filed.” (Item 2) 
 
Applicant provided no documents with his answer regarding any payments 
towards, or the current status of, any of his SOR debts. He gave no further indication 
about how he fell behind on his debts, and provided no details of his current financial 
situation.  
 
In his answer, Applicant acknowledged that he had:  
 
                                                          
9 Applicant disclosed his delinquent child support on his SCA. (Item 3) 
 
 
5 
 
 
made some really bad choices in previous years, being young and 
reckless, but the mistakes that didn’t kill me taught me a few very valuable 
lessons. Mainly it taught me a man’s word should be his bond, and the 
value of hard work. Two lessons I had [grown] up hearing, but didn’t 
understand what they fully meant until my life was out of control. Since 
then I have recreated the best me I can be.10  
   
Applicant also indicated that he works hard at his job and enjoys it. He stated that 
his job enables him to provide for his daughter and allows him to make a positive 
difference with his life. He stated he is dedicated to avoiding the mistakes of his past.11   
 
Policies 
  
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.21 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”22 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
10 Item 2.  
 
11 Id.  
 
21 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
22 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that can cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with 
their intended use can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 
U.S.C 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline 
to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
 (c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of substance abuse disorder.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana extensively between 2006 and late 2014. He used 
heroin extensively between 2011 and 2014. He experimented with a wide variety of 
other illegal drugs, including cocaine, methamphetamines, PCP and ecstasy. On one 
occasion he misused prescription drugs. He purchased illegal drugs often during this 
period. He was diagnosed with drug dependence and drug abuse during one of his 
periods of drug treatment. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j concerns the fact that Applicant sold his own possessions, and stole 
from his mother to finance his drug habit. He admitted the allegation, but I find for 
Applicant here on two grounds. First, the allegation is duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.d, 
concerning Applicant’s arrest for the same conduct.24 Second, while SOR ¶ 1.d 
specifically references a drug-related offense (possession of drug paraphernalia), SOR 
¶ 1.j does not. While his conduct is both criminal and unquestionably bad judgment, 
none of the Guideline H disqualifying conditions specifically apply. I therefore find for 
Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.j.  
 
 Neither Applicant’s participation in drug detoxification in 2012 (SOR ¶1.n), or 
drug treatment in 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.m) constitutes disqualifying conduct. Indeed, each 
action is potentially mitigating. Those allegations are found for Applicant. SOR ¶ 1.k 
mentions drug treatment/education (in 2013-2014) but also mentions Applicant’s 
diagnoses of drug dependence and drug abuse, so it cannot be fully mitigated in the 
same manner.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all  drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility;  
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and  
 
                                                          
24 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice). 
 
8 
 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
AG ¶ 26(c) applies to mitigate Applicant’s misuse of prescription drugs (part of 
SOR ¶ 1.h), which occurred a single time, when he took a few more pills than his 
prescription allowed.  
 
None of the other mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has a long, extensive, 
and extremely serious history of illegal drug use, which ended only in October 2014, just 
before he entered the defense industry. Applicant has had several periods of drug 
treatment, counseling and education, and had a serious and immediate relapse after 
one of them, in 2013. His most recent drug-related charge occurred in June 2015 (albeit 
for an offense that occurred the previous summer). Applicant admitted all the 
allegations, and offered no mitigation in his answer beyond his own unsupported 
assertions. My findings under Guideline E (discussed below) further undercut 
Applicant’s credibility. Given his history, Applicant’s drug involvement is also far too 
recent to warrant findings in his favor. AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b) and 26(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) violation of probation of parole or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant’s drug-related offenses (cross-alleged in SOR ¶ 4.a) satisfy AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and (b). He failed to complete a court-ordered drug education class, after his 
 
9 
 
 
charge for possessing drug paraphernalia in 2013, and a bench warrant was later 
issued for his arrest. That satisfies AG ¶ 31(c).  
 
  AG ¶ 32 sets forth the potentially applicable mitigating conditions:    
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
  
 AG ¶ 32(a) and (d) do not apply, for the same reasons as set forth under 
Guideline H, above. Given his track record, Applicant needs to establish a much longer 
track record of sobriety and compliance with rules, regulations, and the law before he 
can be trusted with access to classified information.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.c is merely a cross-allegation of the drug involvement allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.n. Similarly, SOR ¶ 3.d is merely a cross-allegation of the financial 
allegations addressed in SOR ¶ 2 (discussed below). The judgment concerns 
associated with that conduct are sufficiently addressed under Guidelines H and F, 
respectively, and are not addressed separately here. While those concerns are also 
properly considered under this guideline, as alleged, they are also redundant and 
unnecessary. I therefore find for Applicant as to SOR ¶¶ 3.c and 3.d. This leaves the 
falsification allegations, SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
On his SCA, Applicant answered “Yes” to the question, “In the last seven years, 
have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substances or controlled substances?” 
He disclosed his marijuana use from 2006 to January 2014 but did not disclose any 
other drug use, including heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine, ecstasy and PCP. 
Applicant answered “No,” to the question, “In the last seven years, have you 
intentionally engaged in the misuse of prescription drugs, regardless of whether or not 
the drugs were prescribed to you or someone else?” Applicant did not disclose his 
misuse of prescription drugs. (Item 3)  
 
Both SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 3.b alleged that Applicant deliberately withheld the full 
extent of his illegal drug use because he was concerned that the Defense Department 
would not grant him a clearance if he did so. Applicant admitted both allegations without 
explanation. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth the potentially applicable Guideline E mitigating conditions:    
  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
  
 Applicant only disclosed the true extent of his drug use (particularly his extensive 
use of heroin) during his second background interview, in July 2015, well after he 
submitted his SCA. By then, Applicant was facing charges for an additional criminal 
offense (the DUI at SOR ¶ 1.a). Neither AG ¶¶ 17(a) nor 17(b) applies.  
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
11 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.25 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accrued $11,819 of delinquent debt, which remains outstanding and 
unresolved. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply.  
 
Of additional note in this case is the language in the Guideline F “general 
concern,” which reads, “Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and 
thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as . 
. . substance misuse, or alcohol [or illegal drug] abuse or dependence.” (AG ¶ 18) Given 
the fact that Applicant’s illegal drug habit led him to sell his own possessions and steal 
from his own family, this language applies.  
  
AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
                                                          
25 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
12 
 
 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial delinquencies are 
ongoing and unresolved. They may be attributable, in part, to his various periods of 
unemployment, but they are also attributable to his illegal drug habit. Applicant 
indicated, but did not document, that he has been making payments on his child support 
debts. He did not address any of his other debts in his answer. He did not establish that 
whatever conditions led to his financial problems are in the past and are unlikely to 
recur. He did not establish that he has made a good faith effort to pay or resolve his 
debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20 (b), and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, J, E and F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2: Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-k:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 3.c-3.d:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 4: Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    Against Applicant 
   
       
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
