 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07692 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 
8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that 
date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 6, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 4, 
2016. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. She 
provided a response to the FORM and documents that were marked Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A and B. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. There 
were no objections and all evidence was admitted. The case was assigned to me on 
July 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 65 years old. She was married and divorced three times and has two 
grown children. Applicant has been employed by federal contractors since 1994 and 
with her current employer since 2010. She did not disclose any periods of 
unemployment.  
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent credit cards debts (¶ 1.a-$16,410; ¶ 1.b-
$7,587), which are in collection. In 2009, Applicant disclosed to her security manager 
that she was having financial difficulties and specifically disclosed the two debts 
alleged.2 She also disclosed the debts on her March 2015 security clearance application 
(SCA) and admitted them in her answer to the SOR.3  
 
 During Applicant’s background interview in July 2015, she explained to the 
government investigator that the two SOR debts became past-due in February 2009, 
and both were turned over to collection companies. She stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a 
was closed, and she did not owe anything. She did not explain or provide proof of why 
she no longer owed this debt. She did not know the status of the collection account in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. When confronted with the two collection accounts, she agreed one account 
was for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a for the original debt. She stated that she was not familiar 
with the name of the collection account in SOR ¶ 1.b. Her April 2015 credit report 
reflects both collection accounts.4  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, she provided a copy of a credit report from 
November 2016 and stated, “Please note there are no delinquencies listed.”5 She 
further stated: 
                                                          
2 Item 7. 
 
3 Items 3, 4. 
 
4 Items 5, 6. 
 
5 AE A, B. 
 
3 
 
 
I would also like to offer some explanation as to how the two credit cards 
accounts became such an issue. Both credit card companies began to 
add late fees and penalties when I was unable to pay the minimum 
amount due each month, even though I was still paying them something 
each month before the due date. The balance due grew larger each month 
instead of going down until it overwhelmed me.6 
 
Applicant did not state that she paid the debts or provide any documents to show she 
resolved or settled the debts alleged in the SOR. She stated that she purchased a home 
in October 2015. No additional information was provided.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulty in 2009. She admitted two credit cards 
became past due and are now in collection. She is unwilling or unable to pay them. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted several times that the debts alleged in the SOR are her debts. 
They have been past-due since 2009. They may no longer be listed on her most recent 
credit report due to the age of the debts, but she has not provided any evidence that the 
debts were paid, resolved, or settled. It appears she has the ability to resolve them 
because she was able to purchase a house. These debts are ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply. There is insufficient evidence that the debts were the result of conditions that 
were beyond Applicant’s control. Her only explanation was that she failed to make 
minimum payments on the debts, and subsequently she was unable to make payments 
because of the additional late fees and penalties. Applicant did not provide evidence 
she has acted responsibly in addressing her delinquent debts, that she participated in 
credit counseling, or that her financial problems are under control. There is insufficient 
evidence to show that her delinquent debts are being resolved or she has made a good-
faith effort to do so. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant did not 
dispute the debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 65 years old. She has been aware since 2009 that two of her credit 
cards were past due. She has not provided evidence that she has attempted to pay, 
resolve, or settle the delinquent accounts during the past eight years. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
