 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08309 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government withdrew the foreign preference security concern and Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 6, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 14, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for July 17, 2017.  
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government’s discovery letter, 
administrative notice request, and exhibit list were appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 through 3. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts about Israel. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 25, 2017.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the foreign influence SOR allegations. Applicant is a 43-year-
old physicist employed by a defense contractor since December 2009. He previously 
worked as a federal government employee from July 2005 to July 2007. He was granted 
a DOD security clearance in 2010.3  
 
Applicant was born in Israel. He obtained a high-school diploma in the United 
States in 1992, a bachelor’s degree from an Israeli university in 1998, and a doctorate 
degree from a U.S. university in 2003. He immigrated to the United States in 1999, at 
the age of 25. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen and obtained a U.S. passport in 
2004. He is married and has two minor children. His spouse and children are dual, 
native-born U.S. and Israeli citizens. He and his wife have owned their home in the 
United States since 2009.4 
 
 Applicant’s father, an Israeli citizen, and his mother, a dual citizen of Germany 
and Israel, reside in Israel. They were both born in Israel to Israeli parents. Applicant’s 
father is 67 years old. He retired in the 1990s as an officer in the Israeli military, in which 
he worked in intelligence. He then worked for the Israeli government until 2010, the 
nature of which was classified. Since 2010, he has worked as an independent tour 
guide, but as of the hearing, he continued to volunteer occasionally for the Israeli 
government. Applicant’s mother is 66 years old. She is a retired college librarian. She 
has no affiliations with the Israeli government or military. Applicant’s parents support 
themselves through retirement benefits his father receives from the Israeli military and 
government. Applicant does not provide them with financial support. He visits them in 
Israel and they visit him and his family in the United States approximately once every 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 16-28. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 6-11, 34-38; GE 1; AE B.  
 
4 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 6-8, 28-98; GEs 1-2; AEs A-B. 
 
 
3 
 
two years. He speaks with his parents weekly to biweekly. They do not discuss work-
related matters, but they are aware Applicant holds a security clearance.5 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a dual Israeli and German citizen residing in Israel. She is 40 
years old. She is not married and has one child. She was born in Israel. She acquired 
German citizenship through a law in effect in Israel in the 1990s that allowed the 
children and grandchildren of Holocaust survivors to apply for it.6 Between the ages of 
18 and 20, she performed compulsory service with the Israeli military. Since then, she 
has not been affiliated with the Israeli government or military. As of the hearing, she 
worked for a travel agency. Applicant does not provide her with financial support. He 
sees her when he travels to Israel once every two years, and he has monthly electronic 
communication with her. She visited him in the United States twice, after the birth of his 
children. She is unaware he holds a security clearance.7  
 
 Applicant’s maternal grandmother, extended family members, and friends are 
citizens and residents of Israel. Applicant’s maternal grandmother is 86 years old. She 
was born in what is now the Czech Republic and is a German citizen residing in Israel. 
She is a retired secretary. She supports herself through money that her deceased 
husband, who was an engineer for a private company, invested for her. She has no 
affiliations with the Israeli government or military. Applicant sees her when he travels to 
Israel once every two years, and he has weekly electronic communication with her.8 
 
 Applicant also sees his extended family members and friends in Israel once 
every two to four years, though he has not seen some of these individuals in over 10 
years. He communicates with them electronically on occasion. Most of these individuals 
performed compulsory service with the Israeli military. A few elected to continue serving 
in the Israeli military at the end of the compulsory period. The majority of these 
individuals are not affiliated with the Israeli government or military. Applicant stated that 
he is not close to his extended family members or friends in Israel.9  
 
 Applicant’s spouse and children are dual, native-born U.S. and Israeli citizens 
residing with him in the United States. Applicant met and started dating his wife in 1995, 
when she did a one-year study abroad program in Israel through a U.S. university. She 
was the roommate of one of his friend’s girlfriends. At the end of the program, she 
returned to the United States to complete her studies. Applicant accompanied her on a 
student visa and took classes as an extension student at the same university.10   
                                                          
5 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B.  
 
6 Applicant acquired German citizenship in the same manner, but he renounced his German citizenship 
and returned his German passport when he became a U.S. citizen. Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-98; GE 1; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. at 28-98; GE 1; AE B. 
 
9 Tr. at 28-98; GE 1. 
 
10 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B. 
 
4 
 
 Upon her graduation, they both returned to and lived in Israel from 1996 to 1999 
while Applicant completed his studies and applied for admission to a graduate school in 
the United States. During this period, his undergraduate schooling was mostly 
subsidized by the Israeli government, he received a nominal stipend from the university, 
and he and his wife received some assistance from the Israeli government. They were 
engaged in 1996 and married in 1997. His spouse acquired Israeli citizenship, obtained 
an Israeli passport, and worked in Israel. She is required to use her Israeli passport 
when she travels to Israel with Applicant. She otherwise has no ties to Israel.11   
 
 As both of Applicant’s children were born in the United States prior to Applicant 
becoming a U.S. citizen, they obtained Israeli citizenship by virtue of being born to an 
Israeli parent. As such, Applicant was required to register his children with the Israeli 
embassy. They both have Israeli passports and they are required to use them when 
they travel to Israel with Applicant. Since they are Israeli citizens, Applicant’s children 
are subject to compulsory Israeli military service when they reach service age. Applicant 
has no intentions for them to perform this service.12 
 
  Applicant’s brother is a dual Israeli and German citizen residing in Germany. He 
is 33 years old. He is not married and he does not have any children. He was also born 
in Israel and acquired German citizenship in the same manner as Applicant and his 
sister, as discussed previously. He has never been affiliated with the Israeli government 
or military, and he was not required to perform compulsory Israeli military service. As of 
the hearing, he ran a bookstore and is an aspiring author and editor. Applicant does not 
provide him with financial support. Applicant sees him when their trips to Israel coincide. 
Applicant visited him in Germany in 2012 and 2016. He visited Applicant in the United 
States once between 2006 and 2008. They also communicate electronically on 
occasion. He is aware of Applicant’s field of study and Applicant’s employer, but he is 
unaware Applicant holds a security clearance.13  
 
 Applicant stated that he is loyal to the United States and his foreign contacts 
have no bearing on his loyalty. He has disclosed his foreign contacts since his first 
security clearance application in 2009. He has abided by his employer’s rules pertaining 
to foreign citizenship and foreign contacts. In addition to his home, Applicant has 
$150,000 in retirement assets in the United States. Neither he nor his wife have any 
financial interests in Israel.14  
 
 Since they moved to the United States from Israel in 1999, they have not 
received and are not entitled to receive any other benefits from the Israeli government 
or military. Applicant closed his one bank account in Israel in 1999. He has not voted in 
an Israeli election since 1999. He never worked in Israel and was never required to 
                                                          
11 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B. 
 
12 Applicant’s response to the SOR; Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B; HE 2. 
 
13 Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AE B. 
 
14 Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AEs A-B. 
 
5 
 
serve in the Israeli military due to a medical condition. Other than his father, Applicant 
does not have contact with anyone affiliated with the Israeli government or military. He 
does not discuss work-related matters with his father. His supervisor of eight years 
testified that Applicant is loyal, trustworthy, dependable, and transparent.15 
 
Israel 
 
 Although the United States has provided regular military support to Israel, there 
is a significant documented history of classified information and controlled technologies 
being illegally imported to Israel. Illegal technology transfers, even to private Israeli 
entities, are a significant concern because foreign government entities have learned to 
capitalize on private-sector technology acquisitions.  
 
 A travel warning issued by the U.S. Department of State for Israel, the West 
Bank, and Gaza remains in effect, as the security environment remains complex due to 
heightened tensions and security risks. U.S. citizens are advised that all persons 
entering or departing Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to security screening, 
and may be denied entry or exit. Israeli security officials have on occasion requested 
access to travelers’ personal email accounts or other social media accounts as a 
condition of entry. In such circumstances, travelers should have no expectation of 
privacy for any data stored on such devices or in their accounts. 
 
 Israeli citizens naturalized in the United States retain their Israeli citizenship. 
Israeli citizens, including dual nationals, are subject to Israeli laws requiring service in 
Israel’s armed forces, and must enter and depart Israel on their Israeli passports. Dual 
U.S.-Israeli citizens of military service age who have not completed Israeli military 
service may be prohibited from leaving Israel until service is completed or other 
arrangements have been made. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 28-98; GEs 1-2; AEs A-B. 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant’s brother resides in Germany and has no affiliations with the Israeli 
government or military. Applicant is not close to his extended family members and 
friends in Israel. He sees them once every two to four years, and he has not seen 
some of them in over 10 years. While a few of these individuals elected to continue 
serving in the Israeli military at the end of their compulsory service, the majority of 
them are not affiliated with the Israeli government or military. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are 
not established by these relationships. 
 
Applicant’s spouse and children reside with Applicant. While they are native-born 
U.S. citizens, they are also Israeli citizens with Israeli passports. Applicant registered, 
as required, his children with the Israeli government. His spouse and children use their 
Israeli passports, as required, when they travel to Israel with him. His children are 
 
8 
 
subject to compulsory Israeli military service when they reach service age. AG ¶ 7(e) is 
established.  
 
Applicant’s father, mother, sister, and maternal grandmother are citizens and 
residents of Israel. His father is a retired officer of the Israeli military and a retired 
employee of the Israeli government. He worked in intelligence in the Israeli military and 
on classified work with the Israeli government. As of the hearing, he continued to 
volunteer for the Israeli government after his retirement in 2010. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
are established. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s father, mother, sister, and maternal grandmother are Israeli citizens 
residing in Israel. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the 
above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). Applicant maintains regular contact with them. 
AG ¶ 8(c) is not established.  
 
Applicant’s spouse and children are native-born U.S. citizens residing in the 
United States. Applicant’s spouse acquired her Israeli citizenship when she lived in 
Israel with Applicant, and his children acquired their Israeli citizenship by virtue of being 
born to an Israeli parent, since Applicant was not yet a U.S. citizen. Applicant has no 
intentions of them performing the compulsory Israeli military service, and his spouse 
and children do not have any other ties to Israel. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1999. He became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2004. He received his doctorate degree in the United States, he worked 
for the federal government from 2005 to 2007, and he has worked for the same 
company for many years. All of his financial interests are in the United States, and he 
has none in Israel. He has not voted in Israel since moving to the United States in 1999. 
 
9 
 
Applicant has met his burden to demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis and considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, sincere, and 
credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
this guideline, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.                
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     Withdrawn 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
