 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-08424 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 13, 2014. On 
June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The 
changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 27, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on October 19, 2016. On October 20, 2016, a complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on October 26, 2016, and he responded by asserting 
that the debt alleged in the SOR was resolved. The case was assigned to me on 
September 7, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 4, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on June 9, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that he was entitled to comment on 
the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or 
updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM, but he did not comment on 
the accuracy or completeness of the PSI summary, nor did he object to it. I conclude 
that he waived any objections to the PSI summary. Although pro se applicants are not 
expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to 
protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 The SOR alleges one debt for $21,249 that has been charged off. In Applicant’s 
answer to the SOR, he admitted that his “name has been associated with this account,” 
and he offered an explanation of his involvement. His admissions and explanation are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old “floater,” employed by a defense contractor since 
October 1998. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from July 1986 to August 1996 
and received an honorable discharge. He married in January 1987 and divorced in 
November 1989. He has no children. He received a security clearance while on active 
duty and retained it as an employee of a defense contractor. 
 
 The debt alleged in the SOR is reflected as a joint debt in a credit report from 
November 2014. It was opened in March 2008 and charged off in May 2010. (Item 5 at 
12.) Applicant was questioned about the debt in the June 2015 PSI, and he told the 
investigator he knew nothing about it, that it was not his debt, and that he intended to 
dispute it. (Item 4 at 6.) In his answer to the SOR, he stated that the debt was incurred 
when he cosigned a loan application for a friend while he was on active duty, but that he 
was unaware that the loan was delinquent until he was confronted with the credit report 
during the PSI. He has never been contacted by the creditor or any collection agency 
about the debt. He contacted his friend for whom he cosigned, who informed him that 
he had traded the vehicle for another, and the dealer had paid off the loan.  
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that he paid $2,000 to a 
consumer credit counseling agency in November 2015, and that a representative of the 
agency contacted the creditor to correct the reporting error. The debt is not reflected in 
a credit report from April 2016. (FORM Item 6.) Deletion of the debt from Applicant’s 
credit record was not required by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, because the debt was 
charged off less than seven years before the date of the credit report.3 Its deletion 
indicates that the dispute was resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute 
of limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
 4
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 5
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and the November 2014 credit 
report are sufficient to raise the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”). The relevant mitigating condition is AG 
20(e) (“the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”). 
Applicant’s response to the FORM and the April 2016 credit report establish that the 
debt was disputed and the dispute was resolved in his favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered that 
Applicant served honorably for ten years in the U.S. Navy, worked for a defense 
contractor for almost 19 years, and has held a security clearance since he enlisted in 
the Navy. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised by the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 6
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
