 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04235 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 29, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, the AGs were updated and replaced the AGs effective September 1, 2006.  This 
decision will be decided based on the new AGs. If I were to consider this case under the 
AGs effective September 1, 2006, it would result in the same outcome.  
  
 On April 18, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 19, 2016. 
The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2017.  On August 23, 2017, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for September 5, 2017.  The  hearing was 
held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were 
admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5.  Applicant testified and offered 30 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – DD. The transcript (Tr.) was 
 
2 
 
 
received on September 13, 2017. The record was held open until September 22, 2017, 
to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted additional 
documents which were admitted as AE EE.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security 
clearance. This is his first time applying for a security clearance. He has a bachelor’s 
degree and has taken some graduate classes. He is single and has no children. (Tr. 77; 
Gov 1)   
 
On October 14, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaires for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). Applicant’s security clearance background 
investigation revealed that he had the following financial issues: a $3,612 state tax lien 
entered in January 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 5 at 13); a state tax lien in the amount of 
$8,356 entered in November 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5 at 12); failure timely file federal 
income tax returns for 2007 and 2008 and failure to pay the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) $7,500 for those tax years. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e: Gov 1, section 26); and failure to  
timely file state tax returns and pay state taxes for tax years 2007, 2008, 2009, and 
2010, resulting in a $20,415 state tax debt (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f: Gov 1, section 26; Gov 
2).  
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $3,100 student loan account that was 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 3 at 7); a $751 cell phone account that was 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 3 at 7); and two traffic tickets that were placed for 
collection in the respective amounts of $250 and $55 (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j: Gov 3 at 7). 
 
Applicant admits that he had financial issues after graduating college. He testified 
that he dug a financial hole in his twenties and has spent a large part of his thirties 
digging out of the hole. (Tr. 77) Some of Applicant’s tax problems were the result of his 
former accountant not filing his income tax returns. (Tr. 48-49)  Applicant took proactive 
steps to resolve his state and federal tax issues when he discovered the issue in 2015. 
He also hired a new accountant. (AE Q) He has resolved all of his debts, to include 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR. 
  
The status of the SOR debts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  $3,612.69 state tax lien entered in 2012:  Applicant entered into a 
payment plan and resolved this tax lien on March 11, 2016. (Tr. 28-29; AE E; Gov 5 at 
14-15; Response to SOR, Tab D)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b:  $8,356.71 state tax lien entered in 2011:  Applicant entered into a 
payment plan and resolved this tax lien on March 31, 2016. (Tr. 29; AE F; Gov 5 at 12-
13; Response to SOR, Tab D)  
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c and ¶1.e:  Failure to file 2007 and 2008 federal income tax returns 
and failure to pay the IRS $7,500 for those tax years:  Applicant filed the 2007 federal 
income tax return on May 26, 2008 and paid the tax debt on March 7, 2011. He filed the 
2008 federal income tax return on January 4, 2010, and paid the tax debt on May 14, 
2014. (Tr. 21; AE C; AE D; Response to SOR, Tabs A-B)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d and ¶1.f:  Failure to file state income tax returns for tax years 2007, 
2008, 2009 and 2010 resulting in a total state tax debt of $20,415 for those years: 
Applicant’s 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 state tax returns were filed on or before March 
31, 2015. Applicant entered into a repayment agreement on October 15, 2015 and paid  
the taxes in full on March 31, 2016. (Tr. 21, 28-31; AE G; AE H; Gov 5; Response to 
SOR, Tabs C-D)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $3,100 student loan account placed for collection: The credit report 
incorrectly listed this as a medical account. Applicant paid this debt on December 3, 
2014. (Tr.25-26; AE A; Response to SOR, Tab E) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $751 cell phone bill placed for collection:  Applicant formally disputed 
this account in November 2014.  Applicant claimed the credit reporting agency indicated 
it was an error on their part and the account was removed in December 2014. He has 
no documents to verify this, but the account is not listed on his most recent credit report, 
dated August 30, 2017. (Tr. 22, 25; Gov 4; Response to SOR) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i and ¶ 1.j:  $250 and $55 speeding tickets: Applicant paid these tickets 
on November 25, 2014. (Tr. 22,26; AE B; Response to SOR, Tabs G-H) 
 
Applicant also resolved several accounts that were not alleged in the SOR.  He is 
current on federal and state taxes. (Tr. 32, AE I; AE J)  As of August 31, 2017, Applicant 
had saved over $159,100 in a 401(k) account. He is financially stable. (AE EE) 
 
Applicant’s current accountant verifies that Applicant hired him to prepare and file  
his federal and state income tax returns for tax year 2011 in 2012.  He verifies that 
Applicant previously hired a tax professional to prepare and file his taxes, but the tax 
professional did not follow through with filing the taxes. He states Applicant’s character 
and humanity make him a worthy to possess a security clearance. (AE Q) 
 
Applicant’s friends think highly of him. He volunteers in the community, to include 
serving as an assistant high school wrestling coach. He not only helped coach, but 
served as a counselor to the members of the team, encouraging them to study and 
better themselves. His friends, co-workers, and supervisors describe Applicant as a 
man of integrity.  He is reliable and trustworthy. After moving to another state, he forged 
a partnership between his employer and the local intermediate school for a reading 
program initiative. The purpose was to bring positive male role models into the school to 
read to the students, many of whom did not have positive male role models at home. He 
also visits senior citizens on a regular basis. (AE Q – AE DD)  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required.  
 
 Applicant has encountered financial problems for several years. Most of the 
issues involved state and federal income taxes. He failed to timely file his state income 
taxes for tax years 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010, resulting in delinquent state taxes 
totaling over $20,415.  He failed to timely file his 2007 and 2008 federal tax returns for 
2007 and 2008, resulting in a delinquent federal taxes totaling over $7,500. He also had 
a delinquent student loan and two speeding tickets. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(d) 
apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter 
until evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts 
 
6 
 
 
under agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, 
an applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of 
risk inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to 
be debt free, but is required to manage his or her finances in such a way as to meet his 
or her financial obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;   
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolved the issue; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies because Applicant resolved all of the debts alleged in the 
SOR over a period of several years. Applicant underwent a period of financial 
irresponsibility, but has matured and is now focused on being financially responsible.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies with regard to his income taxes because Applicant was not 
aware that his accountant did not file his tax returns. Once he discovered the issue, he 
 
7 
 
 
filed the returns and entered into repayment agreements with state and federal tax 
authorities. He acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant demonstrated a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He resolved all of the debts alleged in the SOR over a 
period of several years.  He entered into repayment agreements. Applicant’s financial 
situation has improved.  
 
AG & 20(e) applies with respect to the cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.  
Applicant disputed this debt and the debt is no longer on his credit report. 
 
 AG & 20(g) applies regarding Applicant’s state and federal tax debts. Applicant 
filed all of his outstanding tax returns. He entered into repayment agreements with the 
state and federal tax authorities and resolved his tax debts. His attempts to resolve his 
federal and state tax debts began before the SOR was issued. He resolved the federal 
tax debts several years before the SOR was issued. He entered into a payment plan for 
his state tax debts before the SOR was issued and completed the payment plan  
approximately one month after the SOR was issued.    
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
        I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
reference letters as well his active volunteer work in his local community.  I considered 
that part of the tax issue resulted from an accountant who prepared, but did not file, 
Applicant’s tax returns. It took Applicant several years, but all taxes were filed and paid. 
While Applicant’s financial history is not perfect, he learned a valuable lesson and 
 
8 
 
 
worked to become more financially responsible. His financial situation is now stable. 
Security concerns under financial considerations are mitigated. 
    
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.j:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
