 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-06480 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason R. Perry, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with relatives in 
Pakistan raised a security concern under the foreign influence guideline. Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). DoD subsequently amended the 
SOR to add two further allegations, which Applicant also answered.1  
 
 On April 11, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the 
administrative record without objection.2 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on April 
19, 2017, and the record closed on April 25, 2017. 
                                                          
1 The additional foreign influence allegations and Applicant’s response to them are incorporated and made 
a part of Applicant’s original SOR and Answer. 
 
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 11; Applicant’s Exhibits A – O. The discovery letter, correspondence with the 
parties, the notice of hearing, and case management order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – IV. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background & Relatives in Pakistan 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. He immigrated to the United States in 1981, and 
has lived continuously in the United States to the present date. He became a U.S. citizen 
in 1992. He earned an associate’s degree from a U.S. college. He also graduated from a 
U.S. corporate-sponsored school that provides specialized training to those seeking to 
work in one of its franchise retail stores. He earned a living working at one of those stores 
and as a limo driver before becoming a contract linguist for the U.S. Government in 2010.  
 
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1992, Applicant returned his former 
Pakistani passport to the Pakistani consulate in the United States. He is not a dual citizen. 
He never voted in Pakistani elections, but has voted in U.S. elections.  
 
Applicant and his wife, who was also born in Pakistan, married in 1992. She is a 
grammar school teacher at a local U.S. public school. Their three children were born in 
the United States and are currently attending either high school or college in the United 
States. Applicant and his wife recently purchased a 4,800-square foot home in the United 
States for which they paid approximately $800,000.  
 
Applicant’s only close living relatives in Pakistan are his three siblings, two older 
brothers and a sister. His father passed away in 1989, and his mother passed away in 
2015. His oldest brother and his wife (Applicant’s sister-in-law) work in the furniture and 
garment industry. His other brother took over his late father’s construction business, and 
in the past received municipal contracts to build roads and other infrastructure projects. 
His brothers inherited his parent’s estate when their mother died. Applicant’s sister does 
not work outside the home. None of his family members are employed by the Pakistani 
government or have any connection to the government.  
 
Applicant’s contact with his siblings in Pakistan has decreased over the years. He, 
at most, speaks to one of them three to four times a year. His uncles and aunts in Pakistan 
have all since died, and he has no contact with any of his distant relatives in Pakistan. He 
loaned his oldest brother about $60,000 some years ago. His brother repaid the loan in 
full. Applicant has not provided any other type of financial assistance to his relatives in 
Pakistan. He does not own any property or assets in Pakistan. He does not have a bank 
account or any financial interests in Pakistan. He last visited Pakistan in 2014, and before 
then had not visited Pakistan in about six years. He credibly testified that after his mother 
died, he no longer has any true ties to Pakistan.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law (his wife’s mother) became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2015. She lives with Applicant and his wife or her other daughters. Applicant’s father-in-
law passed away about ten years ago, and his wife’s close family members, namely, her 
sisters, are U.S. citizens or permanent U.S. residents who reside in the United States.3  
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 12-46; Exhibits 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 10; Exhibit H.  
 
3 
 
Administrative Notice - The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan).4 
 
Pakistan is a federal republic. The United States has had diplomatic relations with 
Pakistan since its creation in 1947. Over the decades, the two countries’ relationship has 
been guided by their common interests in a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region. The 
United States is Pakistan’s largest trading partner and one of the largest sources of 
foreign direct investment in Pakistan. 
 
The September 11, 2001 attacks led to closer coordination between Pakistan and 
the United States on security and stability issues in South Asia. Notwithstanding recent 
efforts by the Pakistani military against terrorist and other extremist groups within 
Pakistan’s borders, the United States remains concerned about these groups ability to 
operate, plan, and conduct domestic, regional, and global attacks from safe havens within 
Pakistan. The presence of these groups in Pakistan pose a significant threat to U.S. 
citizens and U.S. interests. These groups have carried out attacks against the United 
States, the Pakistani government, and the citizens of both countries. The U.S. State 
Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan because of 
the danger posed by the presence of these groups and other armed extremist elements.  
 
Recent U.S. State Department reports reflect that serious human rights violations 
have occurred in Pakistan. These reports also reflect that corruption within Pakistani 
society remains a significant problem. 
 
U.S. Government (USG) Contract Employment History. 
 
In 2010, Applicant was hired as a translator to support the U.S. military in 
Afghanistan. He submitted a security clearance application in connection with this 
employment, and reported his connections to Pakistan. He then agreed to a security 
clearance interview. The U.S. military conducted its own counterintelligence (CI) 
investigation, including a full CI interview. Applicant fully discussed his foreign 
connections during these interviews. He was subsequently granted a security clearance 
and was designated a Category (CAT) II interpreter, which allowed him access to secure 
areas. This designation also permitted the U.S. military to share with Applicant time-
sensitive U.S. classified information. He was the only cleared CAT II interpreter assigned 
to the forward operating base (FOB) that he was sent to in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant worked in Afghanistan for his former employer from 2010 to 2013. When 
he returned to the United States in late 2013 to visit his family, he was fired by his former 
employer and told the reason for the firing was due to a clearance issue. Specifically, 
Applicant’s former employer told him that his clearance had been suspended or revoked.  
 
In early 2014, Applicant was interviewed by the FBI and military intelligence. He 
was questioned about his work in Afghanistan and his association with members of the 
Afghan military. Applicant discussed his work in support of the U.S. military, and his 
contact with the Afghan military and others in his role as a USG contract translator. He 
                                                          
4 The matters accepted for administrative notice are taken from Exhibit 11, as updated by relevant and 
reliable U.S. Government publications appended to the record as App. Exh. V. 
 
4 
 
told the investigators that he followed rules and regulations about the dollar amount in 
gifts that U.S. contractors and service members could give their Afghan counterparts. He 
estimates that in the three years he worked in Afghanistan, the gifts he gave to Afghan 
soldiers totaled less than $150. He described these gifts as clothing and other consumer 
products that Afghan soldiers could not get and/or afford, but that he could easily and 
cheaply order over the internet from Walmart and other large U.S. retailers.  
 
Applicant suspects that the investigation was started after someone who was 
jealous of his CAT II status in Afghanistan falsely accused him of some sort of impropriety. 
Applicant states that he saw one of the investigators a few weeks after the interview, and 
was told that the investigation had been closed and he would be able to return to 
Afghanistan with no issues. He was later told by his facility security manager that his 
security clearance had never been suspended or revoked. He was subsequently hired by 
USG contractors after going through a second CI investigation. He has worked as a 
cleared linguist helping train U.S. military members deploying to Afghanistan.5  
 
A retired U.S. non-commissioned officer (NCO), who worked closely with Applicant 
during his (Applicant’s) final year in Afghanistan, submitted a letter corroborating issues 
that Applicant described encountering when their base was combined with several others. 
Specifically, the senior NCO writes that Applicant was the lone CAT II interpreter on the 
joint base and he (Applicant) was subject to reprisals after voicing concerns when non-
cleared translators were used in secure areas or were provided classified information to 
translate.6 Applicant believes these personnel issues led to the purported tip to the FBI.  
 
In mid-2014, Applicant submitted another security clearance application. He went 
through another clearance interview and a third CI investigation. He once again self-
reported and fully discussed his foreign connections and contacts. He reports also taking 
and passing a polygraph in connection with a prospective job offer with a USG agency.7   
 
Applicant received numerous awards and decorations for his work in support of 
the U.S. military in Afghanistan.8 His final performance appraisal from his supervisor in 
Afghanistan, a senior U.S. military officer, reflects that Applicant received the highest 
rating and score for his job knowledge and the quality of his work. He also received the 
highest rating of “outstanding” for his “compliance [with] policies, procedures and 
workplace practices,” dependability, judgment, and mission readiness.9 U.S. military 
officers and senior NCOs who served with Applicant in Afghanistan at the beginning and 
                                                          
5 Tr. 46-54, 57-64; Exhibits 1, 2, 5, 6, Exhibits A – D. Other than Applicant’s pre-hearing statements and 
testimony regarding the joint FBI-military investigation, the nominal gifts he gave Afghan soldiers, and the 
status of his security clearance, no (independent) evidence was offered regarding these matters. 
Applicant’s testimony about these matters was consistent with his earlier statements and other evidence.  
 
6 Exhibit I. 
  
7 Tr. 62; Exhibits 1 – 4. 
 
8 Exhibits L – O. 
 
9 Exhibit J. 
 
5 
 
at the end of his three-year deployment submitted letters providing their favorable 
opinions about Applicant’s work ethic, reliability, and loyalty to the United States.10 
Following are some of the comments that these individuals gave about Applicant. 
 
From a now retired E-8 with nearly 25 years of military service. 
 
Applicant and I were deployed together in Afghanistan in 2010. . . . 
Immediately upon joining my team at FOB X, . . . he increased our 
effectiveness . . . He was always available and ready to assist in whatever 
we were doing, and became a trusted representative . . . He understood our 
mission and intuitively weaved American culture and sensitivities with that 
of our Afghan and Pakistani colleagues without incident.11 
 
From a former military supervisor from 2010 through 2011. 
 
On a daily basis, [Applicant] would interpret and translate both classified 
and unclassified information to include verbal and written communications. 
. . . [His] trustworthy reputation, professionalism, and accuracy allowed him 
to be selected on multiple occasions to translate high-level “border flag” 
meetings.12 
 
From another former U.S. military supervisor.  
 
I had the distinct pleasure of working with [Applicant] for nearly 12 months 
in Afghanistan . . . [and] I can wholeheartedly recommend [him], having 
become intimately aware of his phenomenal work ethic, reliability and 
trustworthiness while working together in a very sensitive capacity. . . . [His] 
capabilities and work ethic as an interpreter are impeccable, but his 
assistance and advice on sensitive matters dealing with international 
counterparts were crucial to our mission. . . . Some of the issues that I 
sought and received [his] advice included . . . acceptable methods to 
coordinate Special Operations missions . . . In summary, [he] provided 
outstanding professional advice and support that, in the hands of a less 
capable individual, could easily have endangered both our mission and the 
lives of American and allied Soldiers during security operations. I would 
proudly and unreservedly work with him again.13  
 
From a senior NCO who served with Applicant from 2012 through 2013. 
 
[Applicant] was the category two interpreter assigned . . . to that Firebase. 
He took his job very seriously and was on call 24 hours a day due to his 
                                                          
10 Exhibits A – D, I. 
  
11 Exhibit A. 
  
12 Exhibit B. 
 
13 Exhibit C. 
 
6 
 
indispensable knowledge . . . I worked with [him] every day for eight months. 
His job was crucial to the success of mine . . . If I felt that any member of 
the [local coalition forces] was being deceptive, I would have [Applicant] 
listen to their conversation without them knowing in order to get to what they 
were plotting. [Applicant] never did anything that would lead me to question 
his allegiance.  
 
It is now April 2016, I have kept in good contact with [Applicant] for four 
years. [His] character is impeccable. He is warm, giving and because of his 
Pashtun upbringing never wants to let anyone down. I trust him so much 
that he was invited to my own wedding.14   
 
 Applicant has continued to excel at his job as a cleared linguist over the past three 
years. The executive officer for the military base that Applicant works at writes: 
 
I have worked with [Applicant] in both a civilian and military capacity and 
can attest that he is a person with undying patriotism for the United States 
of America . . . [his] unmatched work ethic, determination for the success of 
the mission, and positive attitude set him apart from any linguist that I have 
had the opportunity to work with in my last 7 years in the intelligence 
community. . . [He] has been a valuable asset to our team and he has 
produced many products that have indefinitely saved the lives of our fellow 
soldiers deployed in the CENTCOM AOR.15  
 
Applicant’s recent work in support of the USG was recognized in March 2017, 
when he received his company’s highest award.16 His current site lead states: “[Applicant] 
has proved himself daily to be a highly capable linguist, and a conscientious and reliable 
employee who pays meticulous detail to work requirements, SOPs, and regulations.”17  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).18  
 
                                                          
14 Exhibit I. 
  
15 Exhibit E. 
  
16 Exhibits F, G. See also Exhibit K (2013 decoration for outstanding work). 
 
17 Exhibit F 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards).  
 
7 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14.19 Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses 
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
                                                          
19 See also ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017) (decision reversed because Department 
Counsel failed to present sufficient evidence); ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (rejecting 
argument that non-alleged conduct can be the sole basis for an adverse decision). 
 
8 
 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s relatives in Pakistan, the joint FBI-military 
investigation that was closed without any finding of wrongdoing, and the nominal gifts 
Applicant provided coalition partners that he worked with in Afghanistan raise a security 
concern. The latter two matters do not raise a security concern. Applicant’s familial ties 
to Pakistan, however, potentially raise a foreign influence security concern. This concern 
is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.20  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
                                                          
20 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle, in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”21 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.22 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate somewhat freely, such an 
applicant faces a very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their 
connections to and contacts with foreign relatives.23 
 
 Here, Applicant immigrated to the United States over 35 years ago and has been 
a U.S. citizen for 25 years. He has created a life for himself and his family in the United 
States. He has established strong bonds to the United States through his family and his 
work. His contact with his remaining relatives in Pakistan and the strength of those familial 
ties have weakened markedly over the years, especially after his mother’s death two 
years ago. At the same time, Applicant’s connections to and commitment to the United 
States have grown exponentially since 2010, when he was first granted a security 
clearance. Over the past seven years, he has demonstrated his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and conscientious in handling and safeguarding classified information. 
In light of the overwhelming record evidence, Applicant can be expected to resolve any 
potential conflict of interest in favor of U.S. national security interests. 
 
A close examination of a person’s conduct and circumstances must be made in all 
security cases. In a Guideline B case that involves an examination of the relevant country 
at issue, to include their present relationship with the United States and other relevant 
factors. A past favorable clearance adjudication does not bar security officials from 
reassessing an applicant’s eligibility, especially when new matters arise. After reviewing 
                                                          
21 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
22 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
23 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
10 
 
and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant mitigated 
any security concerns arising from his foreign familial connections. All of the above listed 
mitigating conditions apply in full or in part, and together with the favorable whole-person 
factors raised by the evidence,24 mitigate the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
24 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining 
whether granting a person a clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
