 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted]   )  ISCR Case No. 15-07505 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing  
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was initially taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, the AGs were updated and cancelled the AGs 
effective September 1, 2006.  This decision will be decided based on the new AGs 
effective on June 8, 2017.  If I were to consider this case under the AGs effective 
September 1, 2006, it would result in the same outcome.  
 
 On July 12, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 15, 2016. The case was 
assigned to another administrative judge on February 15, 2017, and transferred to me 
on May 22, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued on June 5, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for July 12, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
nine exhibits which were marked and admitted as Gov Ex 1-9. Applicant offered 13 
exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-M.  The record was held 
open until June 26, 2017, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He timely 
submitted a document which was marked and admitted as AE N. The transcript (Tr.) 
was received on July 20, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
      Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 
denies the remaining allegations.     
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since August 2010. He worked in 
numerous federal contractor positions before working for his current employer. He has 
maintained an active security clearance since 2002. He served on active duty in the 
United States Army from 1997 to 2001. He separated with an honorable discharge. He 
has some college credit. He is married and has four children, ages 14, 10, 8 and 5. (Tr. 
28-30, 50-51; Gov 1)   
 
On July 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant answered, “No” and did not list any collection accounts, or 
debts that were over 120 days delinquent. He explained on his security clearance 
questionnaire that his credit file was being investigated because of identity theft 
indicating that his social security number was being used to file and obtain his federal 
tax refunds, commit unauthorized transactions, false bank accounts, etc. He mentioned 
he was exhausting all remedies to resolve the identify theft issue. He provided an 
attachment to his July 2014 e-QIP showing the steps that he had taken to resolve his 
identity theft issues.  The attached documentation also mentions in correspondence 
with the Internal Revenue Service regarding 2013 federal income taxes that Applicant 
was behind on his mortgage payments. Also attached was a letter to the Social Security 
Administration, dated June 4, 2014, which among other things indicated his credit has 
been ruined and his security clearance was in jeopardy. (Gov 1, section 26 and 
attachments)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent 
accounts: a mortgage account that was past due $3,768 with a total balance of 
$223,944 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 5 at 6); a $56,158 second mortgage 
that is past due in the amount of $31,641 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 5 at 5); a $999 
judgment filed in 2011 for a medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 4; Gov 5 at 4); an $846 
medical account that was placed for collection in August 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 5 at 7);  
a $388 medical account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 5 at 7); a $205 
medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 5 at 8); a $116 medical account 
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 5 at 8); a $77 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 
 
3 
 
 
5 at 8); a $75 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 5 at 8); and a $75 account  
placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 5 at 9).  
 
The SOR also alleged that Applicant falsified a security clearance questionnaire 
signed by him in 2009, when he answered “no”, in response to Section 28, Your 
Financial Delinquencies “…. a. In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?”  The SOR states, “You answered “NO” and thereby 
deliberately failed to disclose that you had been over 180 days delinquent on numerous 
debts within the relevant seven-year period.”  Applicant denies this allegation. He 
testified that he has never been 180 days behind on debt payments and was not aware 
of any collection accounts. (Tr. 47-48, Answer to SOR)  
 
The record evidence shows that Applicant encountered financial problems before 
2009. However, this does not to appear to have been an issue when he reapplied for a 
security clearance in 2009. (AE 7; AE 8; AE 9) 
 
Applicant testified that the reasons for his current financial problems related to 
the mortgages he took out in 2005 and the subsequent mortgage crisis. His family also 
lost a significant amount of income after his wife lost her full-time job, earning $90,000 
in 2011 or 2012. She lost her job when she was placed on bed rest during a difficult 
pregnancy in 2011.  Applicant could not keep up with the expenses. He also helped out 
his parents financially from 2010 to 2015, sending them $250 each paycheck or $500 
per month.  (Tr. 37-39, 55-56, AE N at 7-12) 
 
When Applicant purchased his home in 2005, he took out two mortgages with the 
same mortgage company. The first mortgage was for $317,000. The second mortgage 
was for $56,000. Applicant had issues paying his mortgages starting in 2008. The loans 
were sold several times to different mortgage companies. The interest rate kept 
increasing and Applicant was attempting to resolve the issue because he could not 
afford the mortgage payments. He hired a lawyer in 2010 to assist him with refinancing 
his loan under the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP). In 2012, his 
mortgage loan was modified under HAMP. Applicant testified that the first mortgage was 
modified and the second mortgage was forgiven. After the hearing he provided a 
document noting that his original mortgagor filed a 1099-C indicating on October 20, 
2013, they cancelled $63,771.19 of Applicant’s mortgages. It is not clear if this applies 
to the first or the second mortgage. Applicant filed this form with his federal income tax 
return.  He initially disputed the second mortgage in 2015. It was removed from his 
credit report. He filed another dispute in June 2017.  The second mortgage is not listed 
on his June 2017 credit report. (Tr. 52-60; AE B; AE I;  AE N at 5)  
 
Applicant’s identity theft issues began in 2011, when someone fraudulently filed 
his federal tax returns. The identity theft issues continued in 2012 and 2013. Applicant 
also noticed a cell phone account that was fraudulently taken out in his name. Attempts 
were made to repossess a car from him that he never owned.  It took Applicant close to 
a year to receive his tax refunds because of the identity theft investigation. He was 
 
4 
 
 
hoping to use his refunds to pay his bills. He has worked to correct this situation. So far, 
he has not had any identity theft issues since 2016. (Tr. 39-43; AE H) 
 
Currently, Applicant is doing well financially. Last year, he received a $40,000 
raise and now earns $195,000 annually. He and his wife attended financial counseling 
and are current on their bills. He provided an updated credit report dated June 29, 2017, 
which indicated Applicant is currently paying all of his bills. There were no negative 
accounts listed on the credit report. (Tr. 44, AE E, AE F, AE I)  
 
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR are: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: $3,768 past-due mortgage account:  The account is current and 
Applicant is making payments. (AE A; AE I)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: second mortgage account past due in the amount of $31,641: 
Applicant disputes this account. He claims it was resolved when he underwent his 
mortgage modification. He initially filed a dispute with the credit reporting agencies in 
2015. He testified the debt was removed from his credit report. In June 2017, he again 
entered a formal dispute with the credit reporting agencies under the Fair Credit 
Reporting Act. He has not received a response from his dispute. Applicant’s September 
2015 credit report indicated that Applicant disputed this debt and that a reinvestigation 
was in process. The account is no longer listed on credit reports dated June 2017 and 
April 2016. (Gov 2; Gov 3 at 2; AE B; AE I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c:  $999 medical judgment:  Debt is resolved. Applicant provided proof 
that he paid a medical judgment to a hospital that is in the same hospital network as the 
name of this hospital creditor. After the hearing, he obtained a statement from the 
creditor hospital indicating and that all of his medical accounts are paid. (AE C, AE N at  
15-17;  Item 7 at 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d:  an unidentified creditor medical account $846 placed for collection:  
Applicant provided sufficient proof that he paid his medical debts. No delinquent medical 
debts are listed on his June 2017 credit report. (AE I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: a $388 medical account placed for collection:  Applicant provided 
sufficient proof that he paid his medical debts. No delinquent medical debts are listed on 
his June 2017 credit report. (AE I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f:  a $205 medical account placed for collection:  Applicant provided 
sufficient proof that he paid his medical debts. No delinquent medical debts are listed on 
his June 2017 credit report. (AE I) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: a $116 medical account placed for collection:  Applicant provided 
sufficient proof that he paid his medical debts. No delinquent medical debts are listed on 
his June 2017 credit report. (AE I) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i:  $77 and $75 accounts placed for collection: Applicant 
testified that these were fraudulent entries related to his identity theft issues. Applicant 
formally disputed these credit report entries in June 2017. He has not received a 
response. These accounts are not listed as debts on his credit reports from September 
2015, April 2016, and June 2017. (Gov 2, Gov 3, AE I) , and  
 
SOR ¶ 1.j:  a $75 medical account placed for collection:  Applicant provided 
sufficient proof that he paid his medical debts. No delinquent medical debts are listed on 
his June 2017 credit report. (AE I) 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his budget. His total monthly net income is $10,828.  
His total monthly expenses are $8,017.  After expenses, he has $2,811 in discretionary 
income each month. (AE G)  
 
 Applicant’s co-worker testified on his behalf. He has a PhD in Management and 
has worked with Applicant for the past five years. He works with Applicant on a daily 
basis.  He has held a security clearance since 2002. He describes Applicant as having 
“the highest moral fiber.”  He notes Applicant is active in the community, is trustworthy 
and loyal.  He states Applicant is a very effective and wonderful co-worker. He is aware 
of Applicant’s identity theft issues, which he recalls began about three years ago.  He 
has no concerns or reservations about Applicant having a security clearance. (Tr. 21-
26)  
 
 Applicant denies deliberately falsifying his July 2014 security clearance 
application. He claims that he was not aware of any delinquent debts that were turned 
over to a collection agency. He testified his wife handled all of the finances until 2014. 
He became more active in managing the household finances after he learned of debts 
during his background investigation interview. (Tr. 69)  He is active in his church as a 
minister and an administrator. (AE K)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be cause or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that 
 
7 
 
 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security 
concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including espionage.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant encountered financial 
problems over the past several years resulting in several delinquent accounts.  Most of 
the delinquent accounts were medical bills. The largest accounts involved his first and 
second mortgages.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case:  
 
AG & 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG & 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant’s financial problems were partially caused 
by circumstances beyond his control.  A difficult pregnancy resulted in his wife being put 
on bed rest in 2011. As a result, she lost her well-paying job causing financial problems 
for the family. Additional medical expenses were also incurred. Applicant encountered 
problems with paying his first and second mortgages in 2008, during the mortgage crisis 
of 2008.  He encountered identity theft issues from 2011 to 2015, most of the issues 
related to the fraudulent filing of his federal and state tax returns. This delayed his ability 
to get his tax refunds. In 2010, he hired an attorney to assist him with obtaining a 
mortgage modification under the HAMP. He was proactive in dealing with the identity 
theft issues. He disputed the accounts that he believed were in error. He also worked to 
pay off his medical debts. His June 2017 credit report shows that he resolved his 
delinquent accounts and his mortgage is current. Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant and his wife completed two formal financial 
counseling programs. He has taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts and his 
financial situation is now stable.    
 
AG & 20(d) applies. Applicant provided proof that he initiated a good-faith effort 
to resolve his delinquent accounts. He hired an attorney to help seek a modification of 
his mortgage under HAMP. While Applicant became delinquent on his mortgage 
payments after the loan modification, his mortgage account is now current and his 
medical debts are resolved. Applicant’s June 2016 credit report indicates no negative 
entries. Applicant took the initiative to resolve his debts.   
 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.h, and 1.i. 
Applicant is in the process of disputing these accounts, in response to the SOR.  The 
evidence supports that Applicant’s second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b) was likely cancelled 
during his loan modification process as indicated by the IRS Form 1099-C provided by 
Applicant after the hearing. He disputed the 2015 credit report entry related to the 
second mortgage. The entry was no longer listed on his 2016 and 2017 credit reports.  
He maintains that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i  were the result of his identity 
theft issues. The entries are no longer on his June 2017 credit report.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under Personal Conduct is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
 
9 
 
 
or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in an unfavorable national 
security eligibility determination, security clearance action, or cancellation of further 
processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or 
polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Under AG ¶ 16, the following could potentially raise a security concern in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
With respect to SOR ¶ 1.a and SOR ¶ 1.b, I find that Applicant’s omissions were 
not deliberate. He testified that he did not think he had delinquent debts that were over 
180 days old at the time of completing both applications. Applicant was not aware that 
some of his medical debts were placed for collection. With regard to SOR ¶ 1.b, 
Applicant indicated that he was behind on his mortgage payments and that his credit 
was ruined in documents that he attached to the 2014 security clearance questionnaire 
related to the identity theft issues. The information provided in the attachments to his 
2014 security clearance questionnaire put the Government on notice that Applicant had 
financial issues. Any omissions in response to section 26 were not intentional and not 
material. The Personal Conduct concern is found for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
10 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 Applicant encountered problems when his wife was unable to work during a 
difficult pregnancy.  He struggled with his mortgage payments, but hired an attorney and 
obtained a loan modification. Identify theft issues further complicated his financial 
problems. Applicant did not intentionally falsify his 2014 security clearance 
questionnaire. He resolved his debts either through payment or formal disputes. He and 
his wife attended financial counseling. Their current budget and credit report shows that 
their financial situation is now stable.  While Applicant has had a history of financial 
problems, currently his financial situation is stable. Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns under Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.   
         
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
