1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 15-08593 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristen E. Ittig, Esq. 
 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his ties to Australia raised security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and  
Guideline C (foreign preference).1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 On September 8, 2017, I convened a hearing. After my receipt of the transcript on 
September 18, 2017, I provided written notice to the parties of my intent to resolve the 
case through a summary disposition in Applicant’s favor. Department Counsel indicated 
that the Government did not object to my proposed resolution of the matter in this fashion. 
See Appellate Exhibit I.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. The AG were published in the 
Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2016). In this case, the SOR was issued 
under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006. My 
Decision and Formal Findings under the revised Guidelines B and C would not be different under the 
2006 Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant is 74 years old and was born, raised, and educated in Australia. He 
earned his doctorate in Physics in January 1972. During the course of his education and 
following the award of his doctorate, Applicant worked as a research scientist for an 
Australian government defense agency (the “Agency”) from 1962 until his retirement in 
2002. During his tenure at the Agency, he worked on the development of a specialized 
radar system. He became a subject matter expert on that system and was promoted to 
the civilian research scientist equivalent of a one-star general.  
  
 Upon his retirement, Applicant wished to remain professionally engaged in working 
on improvements to the radar system and wished to do so in the United States.  He was 
put in contact with a U.S. Government Defense Agency (“AGA”) that was tasked with 
developing and improving the radar system with which Applicant had become an expert. 
Ultimately, the AGA recommended that Applicant take employment with the AGA’s 
principal defense contractor. In September 2003 Applicant moved to the United States 
and took employment with that defense contractor.  
 
 Applicant and his wife have lived in a metropolitan suburb, and since 2007 they 
reside in a home that they own. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. 
Applicant’s only significant financial link to Australia is his government pension earned 
after more than 40 years of government service. That pension pays him about $43,000 
annually and under Australian law may only be deposited in an Australian bank account. 
Its current value is about $480,000.2 In contrast, Applicant’s assets in the United States, 
which include his home and his two retirement accounts, total about $1,500,000. 
 
 Applicant has two grown children who are citizens and residents of Australia. His 
son is employed by the same Agency from which Applicant retired. Applicant does not 
know the details of his son’s work, and he and his son never “talk shop” about their 
respective work. His daughter is a retired accountant. Applicant socializes with friends 
and retired Agency co-workers when he visits Australia, but they do not converse about 
his former or current work. 
 
Applicant’s character witness is a current employee of the AGA. His testimony and 
the eight written Declarations admitted into evidence attest to the esteem in which the 
witness and the declarants hold Applicant and to his sound character, reliability, and 
trustworthiness, particularly in the handling of classified material. 
 
 Applicant has lived in the United States for 14 years, is a naturalized citizen, and 
has personal, financial, and professional ties firmly rooted in this country. Under Guideline 
B and Guideline C, mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), (f), and 11 (e) apply, respectively.   
 
 
 
         
                                                          
2  Applicant’s spouse has an Australian bank account that is in her name only with a balance of about 
$16,000. 
3 
 
The security concerns over Applicant’s ties to Australia do not create doubt about 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and 
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. 
I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that 
Applicant met his burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence)           For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-d:                                           For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference)        For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 2.a-c:                    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
