 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ADP Case No. 15-055271 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate concerns raised by three drunk 
driving arrests, the last of which occurred over seven years ago. Eligibility for a public 
trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging concerns under the alcohol consumption and personal conduct 
guidelines. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On May 18, 2017, the hearing was held. Applicant testified at the hearing and the 
exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the administrative record without 
objection.2 The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 26, 2017. 
 
  
                                                          
1 The Statement of Reasons was amended at hearing to correctly identify this matter as an ADP case.  
 
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 8; Applicant’s Exhibits A – C. Prehearing correspondence, the notice of hearing, 
and case management order are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits I – III. 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 35, is employed as a federal contractor applying for a position of trust to 
work on information systems used by the DoD to improve the quality of care for injured 
service members. He has been arrested three times for driving under the influence (DUI). 
The last of these arrests occurred over seven years ago and the record does not reflect 
any other alcohol-related arrests or incidents.  
 
Applicant started consuming alcohol when he entered college. In April 2003, when 
he was 22 years old and a senior in college, Applicant was arrested for the first time for 
DUI. He went to a bar to watch his friends perform in a local band. He consumed a 
relatively large amount of alcohol in a short period of time and then made the poor 
decision to attempt to drive back to school. He got a flat tire and pulled off onto the side 
of the road. While he was changing the tire, the police pulled up and arrested him on 
suspicion of DUI. He pled guilty, but as it was his first offense the court deferred entering 
a finding of guilt. He was ordered to attend a course on the dangers of drunk driving. The 
charge was eventually dismissed and expunged by the court.3 
 
Applicant acknowledges that the first DUI arrest had no discernible impact, as he 
was young and tended to blame bad luck for his poor decision making. In August 2004, 
a little over a year after the first DUI, Applicant was again arrested and convicted for DUI 
(second). He was at a bar drinking when another male made an unwanted sexual 
advance. Applicant left the bar in a somewhat panicked state and got behind the wheel 
of his car. He lost control of the car and was involved in an accident. He hit a building 
after losing control of his car, but no one except Applicant was injured. The police 
determined that his blood alcohol content (BAC) at the time of the accident was 
approximately .16, or twice the legal limit. He was convicted of DUI on his plea of guilty. 
The court sentenced Applicant to three months in jail (suspended) and two years of 
unsupervised probation. He paid all required court costs and fines, and completed all 
terms of his probation, including the mandatory alcohol counseling course.4  
 
After the 2004 DUI, Applicant stopped drinking alcohol for a few years. But then, 
he started going out with friends and started drinking again. In April 2010, after watching 
his favorite hockey team get eliminated in what he described as a “shocking playoff loss,” 
Applicant decided “to go drown [his] sorrows at the local bar.”5 He felt “tipsy” after 
consuming alcohol, but decided to drive home as he was “only a couple of miles from his 
home.”6 He was pulled over by police for speeding, and was arrested for DUI after 
providing a breath sample that indicated a .15 BAC. He went to court, pled guilty, and 
was found guilty. Applicant testified about the colloquy that he then had with the judge 
after the court accepted his guilty plea and its impact on him: 
                                                          
3 Tr. 26-41, 54; Exhibits 1, 2.  
 
4 Tr. 41-42; Exhibits 1, 2, 4, 5, 7.  
 
5 Tr. 43.  
 
6 Exhibit 2 at 2. 
 
3 
 
 
I’ll never forget the judge saying to me that day, “Mr. [Applicant], have you 
ever been to jail before?: And I said, “No, sir.” And his response was, “Well, 
you are going there today.” And that hit me like a ton of bricks. And that was 
one statement that I will never, ever forget the rest of my life.7 
 
Applicant was sentenced to three years in jail (two of which were suspended) and 
two years of supervised probation.8 He served the jail sentence through a work-release 
program administered by the county jail, which was in Applicant’s own words, a “real eye-
opening experience.”9 He was released early from probation for good behavior.10 
Applicant testified about the impact the probation had on him: 
 
You can imagine some of the people that you’re seeing when you’re sitting 
in a probation office waiting to see your probation officer. . . . you see things 
in there and you think, “My God, am I really here? What, what have I done 
with my life?” And, I don’t ever want to be in this situation again.11 
 
Following the 2010 DUI, Applicant also successfully completed an “extensive” six-
month alcohol treatment program. He received a favorable prognosis from the treatment 
program.12 In response to an inquiry from the Office of Personnel Management, a 
licensed clinical professional counselor with the treatment program opined that Applicant 
does not have a condition that could impair his judgment, reliability, or ability to properly 
safeguard classified information.13  
 
Applicant has not been involved in an alcohol-related incident since the third DUI, 
now over seven years ago. He self-reported the DUIs on his application for a public trust 
position, including the first DUI, regarding which the Government conceded they were 
unable to locate any court records.14  
 
Applicant made a number of lifestyle changes following the 2010 DUI. Primarily, 
he no longer drinks alcohol and drives. He is in a committed relationship and is the 
designated driver when he and his girlfriend go out to eat. He also changed his profession. 
He was a golf pro after graduating from college, and explained that alcohol was readily 
available and part of the culture. He no longer associates with old friends and colleagues. 
                                                          
7 Tr. 30-31.  
 
8 Exhibit 3, Tr. 43-44.  
 
9 Tr. 30.  
 
10 Tr. 43-44.  
 
11 Tr. 44.  
 
12 Tr. 30, 49-52; Exhibits 6, 8.  
 
13 Exhibit 8.  
 
14 Exhibit 1; Tr. 40.  
 
4 
 
 
He now wakes up every morning at around 0500 and commutes about ninety minutes to 
work. He has a similar lengthy commute back to his home, which he purchased a few 
years ago. He loves his job, which he has been at for the past five years, because he 
helps frontline warfighters receive better medical care and treatment.15 Applicant’s latest 
performance appraisal reflects the following assessment by his supervisor: 
 
Applicant is the type of employee every manager wants to have. He 
understands the job, provides quality work, and is very dependable. . . . [He] 
frequently volunteers for additional tasks, seeking to assist his team during 
crunch time. His willingness to do “whatever it takes” is a quality found in 
few. I would recommend [him] to anyone seeking a dependable, trustworthy 
staff member who puts others before himself.16   
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided by applying the applicable provisions of DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive) and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).17  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. The 
standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available 
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.18  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust to support a federal 
contract, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and whole-
person concept. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
the guidelines in a commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable 
information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.19 
 
The Directive sets forth the due process procedures that must be followed in all 
DOHA proceedings. Department Counsel must present evidence to establish 
                                                          
15 Tr. 28-35, 45-47.  
 
16 Exhibit A.  
 
17 SEAD-4, ¶ E.1 (the current guidelines “shall be used by all authorized adjudicative agencies when 
rendering a determination for initial or continued eligibility . . . to hold a sensitive position.”); ADP Case No. 
14-01655 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2015) (“the Guidelines apply to all adjudications under the Directive, including 
both security clearance and public trust cases.”) 
 
18 Directive, § 3.2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. ADP Case No. 14-00590 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014) (“The standard 
applicable to trustworthiness cases is that set forth . . . regarding security clearances: such a determination 
“may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’.”) 
19 See generally SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2.  
 
5 
 
 
controverted facts (i.e., SOR allegations denied by the applicant). An applicant, on the 
other hand, bears the burden of presenting evidence rebutting or mitigating concerns 
raised by their conduct or circumstances. An applicant also has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish their eligibility for a position of trust.20 Any doubt raised by the 
evidence, must be resolved by the judge in favor of the national security.21 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption can raise a concern about a person’s ability to 
handle and safeguard sensitive information. The concern is explained at AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline G, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual's alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment.  
 
Applicant made some poor decisions in his twenties involving alcohol. Following 
the last incident in 2010, when a judge sentenced him to jail, Applicant finally got the 
much needed “wake up” call. Since then, he has made significant lifestyle changes. He 
is a productive, reliable employee who is proud of his work in support of injured service 
members. He has not been involved in any alcohol-related incident in over seven years 
and self-reported the adverse information about his past alcohol problems on his 
application. After considering Applicant’s testimony and the other record evidence, I find 
that AG ¶ 23(a) applies.  
                                                          
20 Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.14, E3.1.15.  
 
21 Directive, ¶ E3.1.25; SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 1(d). 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s past alcohol-related misconduct also raises a concern under Guideline 
E, which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
For similar reasons noted above, I find that Applicant presented sufficient evidence 
to mitigate Guideline E concerns raised by his past poor decisions involving alcohol.22 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s request for a position of trust is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
22 AG ¶ 17(c). 
