 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  16-00268 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on November 14, 
2012. On June 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 25, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. After timely requesting that the case be converted to a 
hearing,1 Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 20, 2016. The case 
                                                          
1 Transcript (Tr.) at 5-6. 
 
2 
 
was assigned to me on March 1, 2017. On April 28, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
May 18, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
I admitted Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 into evidence without objection. I 
appended Government’s exhibit list to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, and its 
request for administrative notice of relevant facts about the Kyrgyz Republic as HE 2, 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
D, which I admitted without objection. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open to 
June 1, 2017. Applicant timely provided additional documents which I admitted as AX E 
through L, without objection. I appended to the record two post-hearing emails as HE 3. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 30, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.2 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.3 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the 
date the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. I 
conclude that my decision would have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant, age 35, married his wife in 2014. He has two stepdaughters, ages 8 
and 7. He received his bachelor’s degree in 2009. He served honorably in the U.S. 
Army on active duty from 2000 through 2002, and in the U.S. Army National Guard on 
active reserve duty from 2002 through 2012. He has been employed as a systems 
engineer by a defense contractor since 2011. He has maintained a security clearance 
since 2009.5 
 
Applicant’s wife and two stepdaughters are citizens of Kyrgyzstan (SOR ¶ 1.a). 
They have lawfully resided with the Applicant in the United States since November 
2014.6 Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, and two sisters-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Kyrgyzstan (SOR ¶ 1.b).  
 
                                                          
2 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
3 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer, e-QIP (GE 1), and the summary of his background investigation interview (GE 
2).  
  
5 See also Tr. at 8-10; 27, 38-42. 
 
6 Tr. at 27, 38, 79, AX K, AX L. 
 
3 
 
Before moving to the United States, Applicant’s wife had been employed by the 
U.S. Embassy in Kyrgyzstan for approximately six years. Since moving to the United 
States, Applicant’s wife has been employed as a freelance translator and as a fitness 
instructor. Recently, she began working for a grocery store. She has never been 
employed by the Kyrgyzstan government or military.7 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is 68 years old and his mother-in-law is 66 years old. 
They reside in the capital city, Bishkek. His father-in-law owns a small engine repair 
shop. While his father-in-law has never been employed by the Kyrgyzstan government 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, he did work for the Soviet government as the head of roadway 
construction. Once the Soviet Union collapsed, he lost that job and became an 
entrepreneur. His mother-in-law is a retired entrepreneur who worked in the textile 
industry. Neither in-law has ever been employed by the Kyrgyzstan government or 
military. Applicant’s in-laws receive “minimal” retirement income from the Kyrgyzstan 
government, which is analogous to the U.S. social security program and not tied to any 
government employment. His in-laws own two apartments and a summer home in 
Kyrgyzstan, which Applicant’s wife and sisters will eventually inherit. Applicant was not 
certain of the values for these properties, but estimated that at one point the two 
apartments were worth approximately $80,000 each.8 
 
Since Applicant’s parents-in-law speak limited English, his wife and 
stepdaughters translate his conversations with them. His wife talks to her parents 
approximately once a week or once every other week, primarily via Face Time. During 
those conversations, Applicant usually exchanges pleasantries with them.9  
 
Applicant’s wife has two sisters, one of whom is her identical twin (Sister A) and 
the other who is the eldest of the three (Sister B). They both also reside in the capital 
city, Bishkek. After working for the U.S. Embassy as a U.S. government employee in 
Kyrgyzstan for 15 years, Sister A became employed by the United Nations. For both 
entities, she worked in human resources. Sister B has been employed by a non-
governmental organization as a cleaning person. Sister A is divorced and Sister B is 
widowed. Neither Sister A nor Sister B have ever been employed by the Kyrgyzstan 
government or military. Sister B’s 26-year-old son has worked for the U.S Embassy in 
Kyrgyzstan for approximately four years.10  
 
Applicant’s wife communicates with Sister A daily by either text, phone, or Face 
Time; and with Sister B approximately once every two weeks. He often exchanges 
pleasantries with Sister A while his wife is talking to her; but rarely with Sister B. Sister 
A has visited the United States twice, once in 2015 for Christmas and once in 2016 
during a work trip. Sister A stayed at Applicant and his wife’s home on both occasions. 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 44-45, 52. 
 
8 Tr. at 56-57, 68-69; AX B. 
 
9 Tr. at 20-21, 54-57. 
 
10 Tr. at 37-38, 52-54, 57-60, 67-68, 70-74, 78, 90-91; AX B. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s wife was in Kyrgyzstan during her 2016 visit. Sister A’s 12-year-old daughter 
stayed with Applicant and his wife in the United States for six months between 2016 and 
2017 while Sister A was on work travel.11  
 
Applicant travelled to Kyrgyzstan twice in 2013, twice in 2014, once in 2015, and 
once in 2016. All of these trips were personal in nature. Except for his wife’s solo trip to 
Kyrgyzstan in early 2017, Applicant was with his wife and stepdaughters either visiting 
his wife’s family or sightseeing. On each occasion, they stayed in an apartment owned 
by his parents-in-law, who reside elsewhere. Since 2014, Sister A has resided in that 
apartment. This is the same apartment where Applicant’s wife previously resided. In 
2015 and 2016, Applicant’s wife and stepdaughters visited for a more extended period 
than Applicant, as it was their summer vacation.12  
 
During her divorce proceedings, Applicant’s wife’s learned that her ex-husband 
had changed his name after the collapse of the Soviet Union because he was wanted 
for a murder committed in Russia. As Applicant, his wife, and stepdaughters were 
planning their move to the United States in 2014, her ex-husband threatened to prevent 
them from doing so. A court finally resolved the issue in his wife’s favor by granting her 
sole custody and terminating the ex-husbands parental rights.13  
 
During that same time period, police officers came to his wife’s apartment on 
more than one occasion; once asking about the whereabouts of her ex-husband, once 
checking for guns registered to her ex-husband, and at least twice asking questions of 
their neighbors about who resided in the apartment. Applicant was present only during 
the gun check. While there, the police asked him to present his passport. Applicant 
does not know whether these police interactions were solely related to the ex-husband’s 
murder charge, his wife’s custody battle with her ex-husband, or with him being an 
American. He reported these police interactions to U.S. Embassy personnel. Since his 
wife and stepdaughters moved to the United States in 2014, Applicant and his wife have 
not had any interactions with the police during their visits to Kyrgyzstan, nor have their 
former neighbors or Sister A had any police encounters about them.14 
 
Applicant’s wife and two stepdaughters, who are currently green-card holders, 
plan to apply for U.S. citizenship at the earliest opportunity.15 His stepdaughters have 
attended public school since they arrived in the United States.16 In February 2016, 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 37-38, 52-54, 57-60, 67-68, 70-74, 78, 90-91. 
 
12 Tr. at 46, 48-51, 76-81. 
 
13 Tr. at 61-66, 81-89. 
 
14 Tr. at 61-66, 81-89; AE E. 
 
15 Tr. at 39; AX J. 
 
16 Tr. at 45. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a home for $525,000.17 Neither own any foreign 
assets nor earn foreign income.18 Applicant maintains a 401K with a current balance of 
approximately $115,000. His wife recently opened a 401K through her fitness-instructor 
employer. Applicant adhered to all of his reporting requirements regarding his 
relationship with his wife and stepdaughters, and travel to Kyrgyzstan.19 
 
Applicant did a 15-month tour of duty in a combat zone from 2006 through 
2007.20 He has served in several other combat zones as a contractor. While serving in 
one of those zones, his duty station was attacked by truck bomb.21 Applicant is highly 
regarded for both his character and work performance.22 
 
Administrative Notice (Kyrgyz Republic) 
 
In response to the Government’s request, to which Applicant did not object, I 
have taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about the Kyrgyz 
Republic: 
 
 The Kyrgyz Republic has a parliamentary form of government intended to 
limit presidential power and enhance the role of parliament and the prime 
minister. 
 
 Since the crisis began in Ukraine in 2014, Moscow has redoubled its efforts to 
reinforce its influence in Eurasia. Events in Ukraine raised Moscow’s 
perceived stakes for increasing its presence in the region to prevent future 
regime change in the former Soviet republics and for accelerating a shift to a 
mulitpolar world in which Russia is the uncontested regional hegemon in 
Eurasia. Moscow will therefore continue to push for greater regional 
integration, raising pressure on neighboring states to follow the example of 
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan and join the Moscow-led 
Eurasian Economic Union. 
 
 The Kyrgyz Republic remains vulnerable to transnational threats, especially in 
southern areas. The recession in Russia increased unemployment among 
Kyrgyz migrant laborers and had significant ripple effects on the Kyrgyz 
economy, potentially leaving the population more vulnerable to terrorist 
recruitment. The Kyrgyz Republic’s counterterrorism efforts focuses on 
countering violent extremism (CVE), rooting out extremists, monitoring the 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 43-44. 
 
18 Tr. at 45-47. 
 
19 Tr. at 47-48, AX C, AE E. 
 
20 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
21 Tr. at 26-27, 42. 
 
22 AXD, AX E. 
 
6 
 
flow of Kyrgyz national foreign terrorist fighters, and preventing those 
returning from conflicts abroad from engaging in terrorist activities. The State 
Committee for National Security (GKNB) and Ministry of Internal Affairs 
(MVD) conducts several operations targeting individuals suspected of 
affiliation with banned religious groups or extremist recruitment activities. 
Impediments to more effective counterterrorism law enforcement activity 
included interagency rivalries, a lack of coordination between the GKNB and 
MVD, and budgetary constraints. 
 
 The most important human rights problems include routine violations of 
fundamental procedural protections in all stages of the judicial process; law 
enforcement officers’ use of arbitrary arrest and torture; and attacks, threats, 
and systematic, police-driven extortion of sexual and ethnic minority groups. 
Additional human rights problems included pervasive corruption. 
Underscoring the country’s human rights problems was an atmosphere of 
impunity for officials in the security services and elsewhere in government 
who committed abuses and engaged in corrupt practices. This situation 
reflected the central government’s inability and unwillingness to hold human 
rights violators accountable, allowing security forces to act arbitrarily, and 
emboldening law enforcement officers to prey on vulnerable citizens. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”24 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”25 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                                          
23 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24 Egan at 527. 
 
25 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
7 
 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”26 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.27 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”28 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.29 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.30 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.31 
  
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”32 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”33 
 
  
                                                          
26 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
27 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
29 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
30 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
31 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
32 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
33 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant and his wife’s close family ties to citizens and residents of Kyrgyzstan 
establish AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). A “heightened risk” is associated with the Kyrgyz 
Republic given Russia’s influence there, the impediments to its counterterrorism efforts, 
and significant human rights problems, including pervasive government corruption. 
Applicant’s ties to his wife and stepdaughters, who are citizens of Kyrgyzstan and lawful 
U.S. residents, do not establish AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), or 7(e). 
 
Application of the guidelines is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
 
9 
 
choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.34 Family 
relationships can involve matters of influence or obligation.35 As a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties 
of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.36 
Moreover, Applicant’s marital relationship provides a conduit for susceptibility to foreign 
influence because of the vulnerabilities associated with the relationship with his in-laws, 
directly and indirectly through his wife.37 Therefore, these family ties raise concerns for 
which he has the burden of persuasion to mitigate.38   
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
None of his in-laws have any connection to the Kyrgyzstan government or 
military beyond the minimal income that his parents-in-law receive in the form of social-
security-like benefits. His father-in-law is a small business owner, and his mother-in-law 
is retired. They own three properties. Sister A worked in human resources for the U.S. 
                                                          
34 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
35 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003). 
 
36 ISCR Case No. 01-03120 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
37 ISCR Case No. 03-24144 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Dec. 6, 2005)(The Appeal Board let stand the Administrative 
Judge’s conclusion that the potential existed for pressure to be placed on the applicant’s in-laws that 
could then be extended to the applicant through the applicant’s spouse.). 
 
38 ISCR Case No. 99-0532 at 7 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2000) (When an applicant’s ties in a foreign country 
raise a prima facie security concern, the applicant is required to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation, 
or mitigation sufficient to carry his burden of persuasion that it is “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to grant or continue a security clearance on his behalf). 
 
 
 
10 
 
Embassy in Kyrgyzstan for 15 years, and now for the United Nations. Sister B is a 
cleaning person and her son works for the U.S. Embassy in Kyrgyzstan. They all live in 
the capital city, which is in the northern part of the country. It is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose the interests of his in-laws over the interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is established. 
 
Applicant’s wife and stepdaughters have resided with him in the United States 
since 2014, where they have made their home. His stepdaughters are being educated 
in public school. Applicant promptly reported his relationship with his wife and 
stepdaughters, the police interactions, and his foreign travel. Since 2014, Applicant and 
his wife have not had any police interactions while visiting Kyrgyzstan, nor have there 
been any police interactions with former neighbors or Sister A about them. His wife and 
stepdaughters plan to apply for U.S. citizenship at the earliest opportunity. Applicant 
and his wife own a home and maintain all other assets in the United States. While 
Applicant and his wife have close family ties in Kyrgyzstan, their financial interests, 
future plans, and loyalties are in the United States. Therefore, I conclude that Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶ 8(b) and 8(e) are 
established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, sincere, 
and credible at the hearing. He is highly regarded for his work performance and 
character. He honorably served in the U.S. Army, including a 15-month tour of duty in a 
combat zone, and has served in several other combat zones as a contractor. While 
serving in one of those zones, his duty station was attacked by truck bomb. Under these 
circumstances, I do not doubt his allegiance to the United States. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person and the “heightened risk” associated with 
Kyrgyzstan, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
 
11 
 
family ties in Kyrgyzstan. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
