1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 16-01203 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an application to continue her eligibility for a public trust 
position on October 22, 2015. On July 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent 
her a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. 
DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation);1 and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 
1, 2006.2 
                                                          
1 On April 3, 2017, DOD Manual 5200.02, Procedures for the DoD Personnel Security Program (PSP), 
(Manual) was published. It cancelled and incorporated the Regulation, but it did not include the provisions 
for ADP cases. ADP cases continue to be adjudicated in accordance with the Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, dated November 19, 
2004. 
 
2 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the administrative record, without a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 22, 2016. On 
September 23, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent 
to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on 
October 5, 2016, but did not respond. The case was assigned to me on September 7, 
2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on December 15, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as required by 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that she was entitled to 
comment on the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, 
deletions or updates; or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not 
authenticated. I conclude that she waived any objections to the PSI summary by failing 
to respond to the FORM. Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like 
lawyers, they are expected to take timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights 
under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c, but she denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f. Her admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old claims customer-service advocate employed by a 
defense contractor since July 1996. She has a high-school education. She married in 
November 1986, divorced in October 1993, and married her current spouse in February 
1998. She has two adult children, an adult stepdaughter, and has legal custody of two 
grandchildren, ages five and six. She was cleared for a public trust position in August 
2004 and is seeking to continue her eligibility. 
 
 The six delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are reflected in a credit report from 
November 2015 (FORM Item 4.) The evidence concerning these debts is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: judgment for $11,202, filed in January 2012 for a delinquent 
credit-card account. In March 2015, Applicant entered into a payment agreement 
providing for monthly $350 payments. She was continuing to make payments as of the 
date of the PSI. As of the date of her answer to the SOR, she had reduced the balance 
to $6,808. (Attachment A to SOR Answer.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: deficiency after repossession of a motor vehicle, charged off in 
May 2012 for $8,399. In the PSI, Applicant stated that she contacted the creditor in 
October 2015, and the creditor offered to settle this debt for $2,300, but she could not 
afford to accept the settlement. (Item 3 at 7.) In her answer to the SOR, she stated that 
the vehicle was repossessed after her husband’s work hours were reduced and they 
3 
 
could not afford the payments. She arranged to borrow funds from another lender and 
pay off the loan, but the original creditor refused to accept payment and sold the vehicle 
at auction. A credit report from November 2015 reflects that she disputed this debt and 
the dispute was resolved against her. (Item 4 at 5.) The debt is reflected as unresolved 
in a credit report from June 2016. (Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: delinquent credit-card account charged off for $3,509. This debt 
is included in the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: medical bill placed for collection of $263 in September 2009. In 
the PSI, Applicant stated that she had been paying $10 per month on this debt since 
about June 2015. The debt is not reflected in a June 2016 credit report. (FORM Item 5.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f: credit-card accounts placed for collection of $8,113 in 
April 2009 and placed for collection of $5,351 in July 2009. In the PSI, Applicant 
stated that she never had credit cards from these two creditors and that she intended to 
dispute the debts. (Item 3 at 6, 8.) The November 2015 credit report reflects that she 
disputed both debts and that reinvestigations were in process. Neither debt is reflected 
in the June 2016 credit report, indicating that the disputes were resolved in her favor. 
 
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the Manual and the adjudicative 
guidelines for assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security. Manual ¶ 7.1a(2); AG ¶ 2.b.   
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
4 
 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to 
protecting classified information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”). The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant delinquent debts are recent, numerous, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant fell behind in her debt payments when her 
husband’s work hours and income were reduced, which was a condition largely beyond 
her control. She has acted responsibly by staying in contact with her creditors, 
negotiating payment agreements, and making regular payments under those 
agreements. Even after being rebuffed by the creditor for the repossessed automobile 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, she contacted that creditor in October 2015 and received a 
settlement offer, which she could not afford at the time.  
 
 A trustworthiness adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
Although the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is not yet resolved, Applicant has systematically 
carried out a plan to resolve her delinquent debts. She has limited education and no 
legal training, but she is astute enough to realize that eventually she will need to 
address the adverse information in her credit report regarding the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b. Her responsible conduct regarding the other creditors, her long employment by a 
defense contractor, and her ability to hold public trust positions for many years without 
incident make it unlikely that she will trigger the concerns described in AG ¶ 19 about 
resorting to illegal conduct. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. It is 
not established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. It is not applicable to the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, which Applicant successfully disputed. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. Applicant 
disputed the debts on the ground that she never had accounts with those creditors, and 
the debts no longer are reflected in her credit record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
6 
 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-person concept, an 
administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by 
considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. An 
administrative judge should consider the adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and applied the factors in 
AG 2(d) in my whole-person analysis. I have considered the fact that Applicant has 
worked for her current employer for more than 21 years and held a public trust position 
for more than 13 years. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her delinquent 
debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust 
position is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
