 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
        ) 
   ) ISCR Case No. 16-03886 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 27, 2017 and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2017. On June 19, 2017, a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
 
was issued scheduling the hearing for August 1, 2017. The hearing convened as 
scheduled.   
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified but submitted no 
exhibits. I held the record open until August 22, 2017, to afford Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted two documents, which were 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript on August 9, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
The new AGs became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or 
after that date.1  
 
 Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.h. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.g, 
and 1.i. He said that SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k had been paid, answers I considered to be 
denials. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He has been married since 2010. He has six children, 
ages 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, and 16. A seventh child died in infancy. His wife is the mother of 
his two youngest children, as well as his oldest child, who was born before they married. 
Applicant’s middle children (ages 12, 13, 15), are the product of a different relationship. 
They are also the subject of the alleged child support debt (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Tr. 26-28, 48; 
78; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant earned his general education certification in 2004. He has since 
attended some trade school. He works as a marine painter at a naval shipyard. He has 
had the same employer since June 2011, and has worked in his current position since 
February 2017. He has never held a clearance. (Tr. 30-32; GE 1) 
  
Applicant works full time, earning $24.76 an hour, and he typically earns about 
$4,000 to $5,000 a month, including overtime. His wife works at a bank, earning about 
$1,800 a month. After monthly expenses, Applicant testified that he has $400 to $500 
left over each month. He also has about $23,000 in a 401k account at work.2 (Tr. 73-76)  
 
                                                          
1 I provided Applicant a copy of the new AGs at the start of the hearing. (Tr. 8-9)  
 
2 These figures are unverified. At $24.76 an hour, Applicant would earn about $990 in a 40-hour week 
(just under $4,000 a month).  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2015. He 
disclosed an outstanding judgment from a prior rental unit (SOR ¶ 1.a) and an overdue 
cellphone bill. (SOR ¶ 1.h) (GE 1).  
 
 Applicant’s largest debt concerns past-due child support. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges 
three separate accounts, totaling a combined $19,211. Two of the figures ($7,825 and 
$4,922) are the balances due for two child support accounts on Applicant’s December 
2016 credit report (GE 4). Another figure ($6,464) is the balance due on an account on 
his November 2016 credit report. (GE 5) 
 
 Applicant claimed that he has only one child support account (though it relates to 
three of his children). When these children were born, he and their mother were living 
together. He testified that when the relationship ended, the children initially lived with 
him (in about 2008-2009). At some point, they went to live with their mother, and she 
filed for child support in family court. The court ordered that Applicant’s child support be 
calculated back to a certain date, resulting in a retroactive delinquency. (Tr. 39-54) In 
his background interview, Applicant indicated that this was because he could not verify 
to the court that he was caring for the children during the period they were living with 
him. (GE 2 at 4)  
 
Applicant testified that he initially owed about $13,900 in past-due child support, 
a figure essentially confirmed by his September 2015 credit report. (Tr. 44, 49; GE 6) 
However, that credit report also reflects that the child support account became 
delinquent in December 2011. (GE 6) Applicant testified that he contested the 
retroactive child support order in family court, but he was nonetheless ordered to 
resume payments in September 2016. (Tr. 44-45; AE A) 
 
Applicant was ordered to pay $1,032 a month. He began making weekly 
payments of about $238 in October 2016. (AE A)3 Applicant testified that of that 
amount, $44 a week goes towards his arrears. (Tr. 42; GE 4) Applicant denied at his 
hearing that he owed anything. However, his child support “summary case account 
statement” as of August 2017 reflected an arrears balance of $8,256. (Tr. 53; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($2,901) and 1.e ($990) are judgments issued against Applicant in 
2008. He denied both debts in his answer, but listed one (¶ 1.a) on his SCA. Applicant 
testified that both accounts relate to unpaid rent for apartments he and his family 
vacated early due to unlivable conditions. Applicant claimed to have negotiated a 
$1,000 settlement with the real estate company last year for SOR ¶ 1.a, but he provided 
no supporting documentation. (Tr. 32-39; GE 1, GE 3) He claimed to have settled SOR 
¶ 1.e in 2009, shortly after the judgment, but he provided no supporting documentation. 
(Tr. 58-61; GE 6) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($822) and 1.d ($912) are consumer accounts in collection. Applicant 
denied both debts. He testified that he did not recognize them and did not acquire credit 
                                                          
3 AE A also reflects nominal payments ($8.77 a week) between June and October 2016.  
 
4 
 
 
cards from either bank. Both accounts are listed on his credit reports. In the summary of 
his September 2016 background interview, Applicant acknowledged one of them (¶ 1.c) 
as a credit card he took out to help his sister pay expenses. (GE 2 at 5) Applicant 
testified that he has engaged a credit monitoring service to challenge invalid accounts 
on his credit reports for $99 a month. He provided no documentation to validate his 
claims that he is not responsible for the accounts. (Tr. 54-58, 63; GE 4. GE 5)  
 
 Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.f (a $60 medical debt). He indicated that he would pay 
it if it was valid, but acknowledged he had not contacted the creditor in an attempt to 
resolve the debt. (Tr. 61-63; GE 6) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($75) and 1.k ($137) are medical debts. Applicant did not recognize 
¶ 1.g and said he had paid ¶ 1.k. Both are listed on his September 2015 credit report. 
He provided no corroborating documentation. (Tr. 64-65; GE 6) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($205) and 1.i ($400) are past-due phone bills. Applicant admitted ¶ 
1.h (and disclosed it on his SCA), but denied ¶ 1.i. which he said he did not recognize. 
(Tr. 66; GE 6) SOR ¶ 1.j ($54) is a toll account that has been paid and resolved. (Tr. 67; 
GE 6; AE B) 
   
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”5 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
5 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
5 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
The financial considerations guideline sets forth several conditions that could 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s credit reports reflect that he has incurred numerous unresolved 
delinquent debts over the last several years. “It is well-settled that adverse information 
from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the 
government’s obligations under ¶ E3.1.14 [of the Directive] for pertinent allegations.”6  
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 11-00046 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2012) 
 
6 
 
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s denials in answer to most of the SOR allegations, the 
Government has met its burden, and AG ¶¶19 (a) and 19(c) apply.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem, and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Given Applicant’s answers, mitigation analysis of this case best begins with 
discussion of AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant provided no documents to corroborate his 
assertions that he does not owe on any of the SOR debts, except for SOR ¶ 1.j. This 
includes small medical debts, two judgments following broken leases, two cellphone 
accounts, and two consumer debts. It is Applicant’s burden to provide documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue. Applicant did not do so. AG ¶ 20(e) therefore does not apply to any debt other 
than SOR ¶ 1.j.  
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to show that any of the other 
SOR debts have been, or are being, paid or otherwise resolved. In particular, Applicant 
did not provide sufficient evidence that he undertook good-faith efforts to resolve SOR ¶ 
1.b, his child support debt. There is no record evidence that he paid child support 
payments between 2011 and September 2016, by which time his child support debt was 
significantly delinquent. Applicant has been making weekly payments toward that debt 
since October 2016, but his recent payments are insufficient evidence of good-faith 
effort on his part, given the fact that the debt was delinquent for a significant period. 
Applicant also provided no documents to corroborate his efforts to pay or otherwise 
resolve any other SOR debts under AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant did not establish that any of his debts occurred due to a circumstance 
beyond his control. He also did not establish that he acted reasonably under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Although several of the debts are old (such as the two judgments), Applicant’s 
outstanding financial delinquencies are nonetheless a “continuing course of conduct.”7 
They are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to 
establish that the behavior which led to his financial problems happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not continue to cast doubt on his current judgment, trustworthiness and reliability. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:      For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
