 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01787 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 7, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 20, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On September 16, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (Item 
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2016.  He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.)  
On October 26, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 5 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on October 27, 2016, and received by him on November 1, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant failed to respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 5, and they were admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 58 years old. He is married and has two teenaged children.  He is 
employed with a defense contractor as a Test Technician.   He is seeking to retain a 
security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified four debts totaling approximately $31,000 as well as an unspecified foreclosed 
mortgage account.  Applicant admits to each of the delinquent accounts listed in 
subparagraphs 1(b), 1(c) and 1(d), and states that he is making monthly payments 
toward the debts.  In regard to subparagraph 1(a), he denies that he owes anything 
toward the foreclosed property.   
 
Credit Reports of Applicant dated May 9, 2015 and April 22, 2016, confirm the 
indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 4 and 5.)  Applicant has been 
working for his current employer since January 2010. 
 
Applicant has worked in the defense industry for over 35 years and has held a 
security clearance during that entire time.  He explained that in 2009, the contract he 
was working on ended, and he was without employment and unable to pay his 
mortgage and other expenses.   
 
 
 
3 
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1(a) A mortgage account with CITMORTGE was foreclosed in about 2010.  
Applicant states that he hired a realtor to short sell his home, but that was unsuccessful.  
The lender then foreclosed on Applicant’s house and sold the house to another party.  
Applicant states that his debt was satisfied with the sale of the home.  (Answer to SOR.)  
Applicant has provided no documentary evidence to support his averment.   
 
 1(b) A delinquent home equity loan owed to CITIZRNSBK was charged off.  The 
account remains owing.  Applicant claims that this money was used for a new roof and 
siding for the house.  He states that he is currently making payments toward resolving 
the debt.  (Answer to SOR.)  Applicant has provided no documentary evidence to 
support this averment.   
 
 1(c) A delinquent credit card debt owed to CAP ONE was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $19,655.  Applicant claims that he is currently making payments 
toward resolving the debt.  (Answer to SOR.)  Applicant has provided no documentary 
evidence to support this averment. 
 
 1(d) A delinquent credit card debt owed to CHASE was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $11,919.  Applicant claims that he is currently making payments 
toward resolving the debt.  (Answer to SOR.)  Applicant has provided no documentary 
evidence to support this averment. 
 
 There is no documentation in the record to show that Applicant has made any 
financial arrangements or that he has followed through with any agreements he may 
have made with any of his creditors.  Thus, each of the debts listed in the SOR continue 
to remain delinquent and owing.   
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) date April 20, 2015.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  In response to Section 26 
concerning his financial record, Applicant was asked if in the past seven years, had he 
any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? And 
further, in the past seven years, had he any account or credit card suspended, charged 
off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?  The Applicant answered, “NO” to both 
questions.  These were both false answers.  Applicant failed to disclose his mortgage 
foreclosure and the charged off debts discussed above.  (Government Exhibit 2.)      
 
 Applicant apologizes for his dishonesty during the investigative process.  
(Answer to SOR.)  He states that he was extremely nervous and afraid of losing his 
security clearance.    He further states that he is not a risk to the Government as he has 
no intention to sell secrets to anyone for financial gain.  Applicant’s conduct shows 
unreliability and untrustworthiness.  He must know after 35 years working for the 
defense industry that he must be honest and truthful with the Government on his 
security clearance application.  There is no excuse for his misconduct.   
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant is excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He has failed 
to prove that he has done anything to resolve the debts.  The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant was without employment in 2009, after his contract ended with his 
previous employer.  However, he was subsequently hired by his current employer with 
whom he has worked for the past 17 years.  Applicant states that he is, and has been 
working to resolve his delinquent debts, but he has provided no documentation to 
 
6 
 
substantiate his averments.  He failed to establish that he acted reasonably or 
responsibly with respect to his debts.  Accordingly it is found that his debts all remain 
owing. Furthermore, Applicant has not demonstrated that future financial problems are 
unlikely.  There are no indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are 
under control.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Appellant failed to disclose the SOR-listed debts that include his foreclosure and 
his charged off accounts, in response to questions about his financial record on his 
security clearance application.  He clearly knew he had debts that had not been 
resolved, yet, he willfully chose not to include them on the e-QIP. He also failed to list 
his foreclosure.  This behavior indicates questionable judgment, unreliability, and 
untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case.  Applicant intentionally and deliberately attempted to 
conceal material information from the Government regarding his financial record 
because he was in fear of losing his security clearance.  Appellant did not make prompt 
or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification and concealment. He was not ill advised.  
Falsifying material information is a serious offense, and Appellant has done nothing to 
show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. He has not provided sufficient 
evidence to meet his burden of proof with respect to his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant is a long time 
employee of the defense department who states that he is making payments to resolve 
his debts, but has failed to provide any documentation to show proof of payment.  
 
8 
 
Furthermore, Applicant must understand the need to ensure that only individuals with 
whom the Government can trust should be provided access to classified information.  
Applicant has not demonstrated that he is candid, honest, and/or trustworthy.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
