 
1 
  
             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01832 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He cosigned on a student loan 
for his niece, which was not repaid in accordance with the loan agreement. He failed to 
mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 20, 
2016, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
August 29, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On September 28, 2016, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
(DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM). The FORM contained nine attachments (Items). On October 7, 2016, 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to 
the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
November 6, 2016. No response or other additional information was received from 
Applicant. On August 1, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted cosigning on his niece’s student 
loan account. I incorporate Applicant’s admission as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old property control officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since December 2006, and he seeks to retain a top-secret security clearance. 
(Item 5) 
 Applicant’s February 2016 credit report indicates $19,632 was charged off on an 
educational debt incurred in September 2006. (Item 7) The amount written off is the same 
as the high credit on the delinquent obligation. The terms of the loan required $180 
monthly payments for 199 months. (Item 7)  
 In September 2010, Applicant had a personal subject interview (PSI) with a 
defense investigator during which the SOR delinquent obligation (SOR 1.a, $19,632) was 
discussed. (Item 8) Applicant stated that in 2005 and 2006 he had cosigned on his niece’s 
student loans. He indicated he had been working with Sallie Mae to have the matter 
resolved and the debt obligations became the full responsibility of his niece. (Item 8) He 
provided no documentation corroborating what transpired between him and Sallie Mae. 
At some undisclosed time, the loans were in a deferral status. He admitted cosigning on 
the loans, but did so not knowing his niece would default on the notes. At that time, there 
were five student loans totaling $54,405. An August 2010 credit report indicated all five 
notes had been 180 days or more past due and the latest reported delinquencies on the 
five loans had been two months earlier in June 2010. (Item 6)  
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
In a March 2016 PSI, Applicant was questioned about the $19,632 charged off 
student loan account. He admitted that he had cosigned the student loan and had been 
previously contacted about nonpayment. He indicated that he would contact his niece 
and make sure that she was repaying the delinquent loan. (Item 8) No documents were 
presented requesting the holder of the note to release him, as cosigner, from the student 
loan.  
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he provided a letter3 stating the creditor had agreed 
to accept his niece’s offer to pay $100 monthly beginning on September 16, 2016. (Item 
4) He failed to provide any documentation corroborating that any payments have been 
made in accord with the offer.  
 Applicant was informed in the FORM that the delinquent obligation remains 
outstanding and that there was no evidence payments had been made. The FORM 
stated: 
. . . you shall have 30 days from the receipt of this information in which to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate . . . If you do not file 
any objections or submit any additional information within 30 days of receipt 
of this letter, you case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely on this file of relevant material. (FORM) 
No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He did not provide any 
documentation as to payment on or the current status of the delinquent obligation. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
                                                          
3 The September 1, 2016 letter is dated two weeks after the August 20, 2016 SOR. 
 
4 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed-upon 
 
5 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
Applicant cosigned on his niece’s student loans. During his September 2010 and 
March 2016 PSIs, he was questioned about the $19,632 delinquent obligation on which 
he had cosigned. AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” 
 
The Government’s evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
 Five of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
  
 
6 
In 2005 and 2006, Applicant cosigned on his niece’s student loans. Cosigning is 
the act of signing for another person’s debt which legally obligates the cosigner to make 
payment on the debt if the primary debtor defaults. A cosigner is liable for the entire 
balance in the event of default. Once a person cosigns they are tied to the debt for as 
long as it is owed. A lender is under no obligation to release the cosigner from liability 
until the entire debt is paid.  
 
 Applicant is liable on the delinquent SOR obligation. He has provided no 
documentation corroborating that Sallie Mae or the current holder of the note has 
released him from legal repayment liability on the loans. He provided a letter from the 
current holder of the debt that accepted his niece’s offer to make payment on the debt. 
He provided no documents showing he had requested that the holder of the note release 
him, as cosigner, from the note. 
 
 Applicant has shown the creditor accepted an offer to settle the delinquent 
obligation. There is no showing that payment has been made in accord with the 
agreement. Without payment showing compliance, an offer is merely a letter of intent and, 
as such, fails to establish a good-faith effort to repay the delinquent obligation. 
 
A settlement offer, if accepted, is a promise to take action in the future. A promise 
to take remedial steps in the future does not constitute evidence of demonstrated reform 
and rehabilitation. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0544 (May 12, 1997) at p. 5 (promise to 
take remedial action in future, however credible and sincere, not evidence of actual 
rehabilitation). 
 
An applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously, but he is required to act responsibly given his 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
“concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has not 
presented any evidence of significant actions taken in implementation of a reasonable 
repayment plan.  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of what responsible steps he took to pay or resolve 
this obligation other than to show that his niece offered to pay $100 per month on the 
debt, which was accepted. The delinquent obligation did not occur under unusual 
conditions, and the failure to timely pay those obligations is not an unusual condition 
unlikely to recur. Applicant has known about his niece’s default on the loan for several 
years and has made no payments nor ensured that his niece made any payments. This 
delinquent obligation casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s niece failed to repay the student loans, which may be beyond his 
control, but that is the risk he took as a cosigner. He has not acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence of financial counseling 
or clear indications that the delinquent obligation is being resolved or is under control. AG 
 
7 
¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith 
payments towards his delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing 
a reasonable ongoing plan to pay or resolve a sizeable debt for which he is legally liable 
and which continues to adversely affect his credit. Without evidence of payment, a good-
faith effort to repay is not established. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Applicant asserts this debt is his niece’s debt and not his debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply, because as a cosigner he cannot successfully dispute the legitimacy of the 
delinquent obligation. He has not shown any documentation corroborating his efforts to 
have the holder of the note release him from liability or that he has been released from 
liability. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Applicant cosigned on a number of student loans. By cosigning he agreed to pay 
the debt if his niece defaulted on the loans. Those loans were not paid. Applicant, as 
cosigner, is responsible for payment of the debt.  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about this 
delinquent obligation since his September 2010 interview when he was specifically 
confronted about the student loans debt. Additionally, he was again questioned about the 
delinquent obligation during his March 2016 interview. The August 2016 SOR and 
September 2016 FORM put him on notice of the Government’s concern about the 
delinquent student loan obligation. The FORM specifically informed him there was no 
evidence that payment had been made on the debt. There is no evidence he has 
contacted the holder of the note. He asserted he had previously contacted the holder of 
the note, but provided no documentation regarding his past efforts to address this 
delinquent debt.  
 
8 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. By failing to provide 
such information, and in relying on only the limited response in his SOR Answer, Applicant 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(e) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
