 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 20, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated May 20, 2015). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed reasons 
why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR, as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated July 5, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on October 31, 2016, and she was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on 
November 14, 2016. Applicant’s response was due on December 14, 2016. Applicant 
took advantage of that opportunity, and on December 9, 2016, she submitted several 
documents to which there was no objection. The case was assigned to me on August 10, 
2017.  
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the People’s Republic of China (China) appearing in 11 
U.S. Government publications which were identified, but only fragments of extracts of 
those publications were attached to the request. Facts are proper for administrative notice 
when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the 
case. In this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding China in 
publications of the U.S. Department of State, the U.S. Department of Defense, the U.S. 
Department of Justice, the Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, and the 
U.S. – China Economic and Security Review Commission.  
 
The press release from the U.S. Department of Justice was presented apparently 
to substantiate that China actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety 
information, and, therefore, Applicant’s relationships with her various family members and 
extended family members in China raises suspicion of her. The case cited does not 
involve Applicant personally, nor does it involve espionage through any familial 
relationship. The anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of 
decreased relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, especially where 
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Item 1 (Answer to the SOR, dated July 5, 2016). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
there is no evidence that Applicant, or any member of her family or extended family, was 
ever involved in any aspect of the cited case or ever targeted by any Chinese intelligence 
official. Furthermore, the press release is little more than a self-congratulatory public 
relations product issued by a public relations office, with the collateral effect of deterring 
other criminals contemplating possible attacks on our national security. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 201, 
Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,4 as set forth below 
under the China subsection. However, while I do not reject the facts set forth in the press 
release, the inference that somehow Applicant and/or her family, or her extended family, 
participated in criminal activity was not argued during the hearing and is specifically 
rejected.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, two of the factual 
allegations pertaining to foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been a 
Failure Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action System (FRACAS) engineer with the 
company since November 2014. She is a 2007 high school graduate, and she received 
a bachelor’s degree in 2011, and a master’s degree in 2013. She has never served with 
the U.S. military or any other military. She was granted a secret security clearance in 
2009, and at some unspecified point was granted an interim top secret security clearance 
with access to sensitive compartmented information (TS-SCI). In 2012, that TS-SCI was 
suspended when Applicant self-reported an incident of misdemeanor misconduct. 
Applicant has never been married, and she has no children.  
 
Foreign Influence5 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. Her mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen 
(naturalized in 1979) born in Taiwan, and residing in the United States. It is unclear if she 
                                                          
4 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts 
that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing internet sources 
for numerous documents). In this instance, although Department Counsel has selected only certain pages of facts 
appearing in the identified publications, I have not limited myself to only those facts, but have considered the 
publications in their entirety. 
 
5 General source information pertaining to Applicant and her family members discussed below can be found 
in the following exhibits: Item 1, supra note 3; Item 2, supra note 1; Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 
19, 2012); and Item 4 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 2, 2015). 
 
4 
                                      
 
has had any positions other than homemaker. Applicant’s father is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen (naturalized in 1990) born in China, and residing in the United States. Before his 
retirement, he operated a U.S. – based business which required frequent travel to China 
because China was a big purchaser of his products. After he “retired,” he continued to 
serve as a consultant for several years, but no longer does so. He is in his 70s. Because 
of her father’s extensive travel when she was growing up, Applicant rarely saw him or 
spent time with him. In 1999, because of relationship issues between her parents, 
Applicant and her mother followed her father to China in the hopes of strengthening the 
family relationship. Applicant spent three of the four and one-half school years in China 
attending a boarding school, and each summer, Applicant and her mother returned to the 
United States.  
 
In 2003, Applicant and her mother returned to the United States permanently. Her 
father remained in China as a business consultant until 2011. Applicant subsequently 
learned that her father had been engaged in an extra-marital affair, causing the 
relationship problems between her parents, and Applicant stopped speaking with her 
father for several years. The marital relationship was apparently eventually partially 
restored, and Applicant recently resumed speaking to her father. Although her father 
returned to the United States to reside here, he has returned several times for a few 
months for traditional Chinese medical treatments to address several serious medical 
conditions. While in China, her father would stay with his sister. As of October 2016, 
Applicant’s father no longer planned to return to China for medical treatment as he 
believes he is too old to fly. Applicant also has a half-sister who is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen born in China, but residing in the United States. 
 
There are two other members of Applicant’s extended family who remain citizen-
residents of China. Her father’s sister, a homemaker who was a retired bookkeeper, 
passed away in 2014. Her widowed husband is a retired clerk whom Applicant last saw 
in 2008. Applicant’s cousin is or was a clerk for a hotel, supermarket, and a clothing store. 
Applicant last saw him for two hours in 2014, and before that, had not seen him since 
2008. Applicant communicates with her uncle and cousin about twice per year, usually to 
say hello on the New Year and one other time during the year. The lack of contact is for 
no particular reason other than Applicant and her extended family were never close to 
begin with and they “grew up on other sides of the world.” No member of Applicant’s 
family or extended family was ever affiliated with the Chinese government, its military, or 
intelligence services. Applicant noted that the “United States has always been [her] home, 
[her] culture, a place where [she is] proud to be in, and honored to be a citizen of.” 
 
 Applicant has no assets or financial interests in China. Her father does not own a 
home in China, and when he resided there, he generally resided with his now-deceased 
sister. 
 
China 
 
China has an authoritarian Communist government, with powerful military forces, 
including strategic nuclear weapons and missiles. It is geographically vast and has a 
population of over a billion people. It has significant resources and an economy that in 
 
5 
                                      
 
recent years has expanded substantially. In China, reported human rights problems 
include suppression of political dissent, arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, 
disappearance, torture and mistreatment of prisoners, and “arbitrary or unlawful 
deprivation of life.” China also monitors telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, 
e-mail, text messaging, and internet communications, and sometimes nonconsensual 
monitoring with listening devices and surreptitious searching of hotel guestrooms.  
 
China has been characterized as “the most aggressive country conducting 
espionage against the United States, focusing on obtaining U.S. information and 
technologies beneficial to China’s military modernization and economic development.” 
Those activities include economic espionage, theft of trade secrets, export control 
violations, and technology transfer. It actively collects military, economic and proprietary, 
industrial information about the United States of the following types, including: information 
and communications technology; military technologies, particularly marine systems and 
aerospace and aeronautics; civilian and dual-use technologies, especially clean 
technologies, advanced materials and manufacturing techniques, healthcare, 
pharmaceuticals, and related technologies, and agricultural technology; and business 
information, especially energy and other natural resources and macroeconomic 
information. Americans of Chinese ancestry are considered prime intelligence targets by 
China. “The crux of the Chinese approach is not to try to exploit a perceived vulnerability 
but to appeal to an individual’s desire to help China out in some way . . . ethnic targeting 
to arouse feelings of obligation is the single most distinctive feature of Chinese 
intelligence operations.” U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have 
characterized China’s espionage and industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the 
security of U.S. technology. 
 
While there have been a number of criminal incidents involving individuals, 
companies, and Chinese intelligence officers improperly acquiring U.S. economic 
intelligence and proprietary information, there is no direct or indirect connection to, or 
involvement with, Applicant, her family, or her extended family.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”6 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”7   
 
                                                          
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
7 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”8 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.9  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”10  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”11 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
                                                          
8 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
10 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
11 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG 
¶ 6.  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes a condition that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s father, a naturalized U.S. citizen, temporarily resided in China and did 
business or served as a consultant there for several years, and after he retired in the 
United States, he returned to China for traditional medical treatment on a periodic basis. 
He now permanently resides in the United States, and he has no plans on returning to 
China. Her uncle and cousin, both Chinese citizens, reside in China. When foreign family 
ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as 
each individual family member must be analyzed.12 If only one relative lives in a foreign 
country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information.13 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
8 
                                      
 
foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. Moreover, 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.14 Furthermore, “even 
friendly countries can have profound disagreements with the United States over matters 
they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”15 Friendly nations have 
engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, 
and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship 
with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United 
States. It is reasonable to presume that a contentious relationship, or the absence of a 
democratic government, is not determinative, but it may make it more likely that a foreign 
government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in that 
foreign country. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge must 
also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue.16  
 
In this instance, as noted above, there is substantial evidence to reflect that China 
aggressively engages in economic espionage or military intelligence activity directed 
toward the United States. The activities of Chinese authorities are sufficient to establish 
a “heightened risk” – a risk that is greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. AG ¶ 7(a) has been established as it pertains 
to Applicant’s uncle and cousin, but not to Applicant’s father. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
                                                          
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004) (“The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 00-00317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
16 See ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply. At the outset of this analysis, it is important to 
note that Applicant has vastly differing relationships and frequency of contacts with her 
various family members. Her mother’s status and her half-sister’s status are of little 
concern to the Government as there is no SOR allegation pertaining to them.  
 
On the other hand, the status of Applicant’s father, uncle, and cousin is different, 
and they are focused upon in the SOR. The security concern with respect to Applicant’s 
father has been greatly reduced, and the heightened risk surrounding him has been 
eliminated, since the SOR was issued. He no longer works, consults, resides, or seeks 
traditional medical treatment in China. Now that he has retired in the United States, and 
considers himself to be too old to travel by plane, he has no intentions of returning to 
China. He is a naturalized U.S. senior citizen residing in the United States. Furthermore, 
while Applicant’s relationship with her father has seemingly thawed over time, it still is not 
as close as the traditional father-daughter relationship.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with her uncle and cousin is very different. As Chinese 
citizen-residents, they require the most scrutiny. Applicant’s relationship with them is, for 
the most part, non-existent. Her uncle is a retired clerk whom Applicant last saw in 2008. 
Applicant’s cousin is or was a clerk for a hotel, supermarket, and a clothing store, and 
Applicant last saw him for two hours in 2014, and before that, had not seen him since 
2008. Applicant communicates with her uncle and cousin twice a year, usually to say hello 
on the New Year and one other time during the year. The lack of contact is for no particular 
reason other than Applicant and her extended family were never close to begin with and 
they “grew up on other sides of the world.” Applicant’s relationship with them is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation.  
 
As noted above, there is no evidence that these relatives have been political 
activists, challenging the policies of the Chinese Government. There is no evidence these 
relatives currently work for or have ever worked for the Chinese Government, military, or 
intelligence service. Likewise, there is no evidence that terrorists or the Chinese 
Government have approached or threatened Applicant or her relatives for any reason. 
And, there is no evidence that those family members in China currently engage in 
activities which would bring attention to them or that they or other Chinese elements are 
even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that these relatives 
would be targets for coercion or exploitation.17 
                                                          
17 The Appeal Board has ruled that in the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal error to give significant 
weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States (ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and 
noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the foreign government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR 
Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate 
FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-
29403 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), financial 
 
10 
                                      
 
Applicant’s ties to the United States run deep. She was born in the United States. 
While she attended boarding school in China for several years, she graduated from high 
school and earned two degrees from universities in the United States, and has worked 
here. Her deep relationship with the United States weighs against a security concern for 
the relationships she has with an uncle and cousin. She can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Her parents and half-sister, all naturalized 
U.S. citizens, reside in the United States. Applicant’s values are U.S. values.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.18   
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s circumstances. She 
attended boarding school in China for several years; her father worked in and with China 
for many years; after he retired, her father returned to China periodically for traditional 
Chinese medical treatment; and she has an uncle and cousin who are Chinese citizen-
residents.  
                                                          
independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial dependency upon applicant 
(ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of any connection between the foreign relative and the 
foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt 
at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); and a foreign country’s friendly 
relationship with the U.S., its stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United 
States (ISCR Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005)). Notwithstanding the Appeal Board’s position, I 
conclude that many of these factors are pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person concept; however, 
I will give limited weight to such factors in compliance with the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence.  
 
18 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. Applicant’s entire life is now centered in the United States. This is where she 
was born, where she graduated from high school, where she obtained two degrees, and 
where she has worked. Her deep relationship with the United States weighs against a 
security concern for the rather distant relationships she has with an uncle and cousin. 
She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Her 
parents and half-sister, all naturalized U.S. citizens, reside in the United States. 
Applicant’s values are U.S. values.  
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence. See 
SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
