 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00738 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se  
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, by demonstrating that his delinquent debts have now been paid or  
otherwise resolved, and similar financial issues are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s eligibility 
for continued access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 30, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 20, 2016, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), along with 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on October 25, 
2016. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded to the FORM on November 16, 2016. He 
provided a narrative statement and four documents, which are marked collectively as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the 
pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on July 1, 2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These AGs 
apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.a-1.e) without explanation. I have 
incorporated his answers into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He was married from 1996 to 2000, and he re-married in 
2006. He has one child with his second wife, born in 2002 (age 15), and a 20-year-old 
stepdaughter. Applicant served in the United States Army (1996-1999). He briefly served 
in the Army Reserves (2003) before spending six years in the Air National Guard (2003-
2009). (Items 3, 4) 
 
 After leaving the Army in 1999, Applicant has largely been employed in the defense 
industry. He worked for defense contractors at a military base in his home state (State 1) 
from 1999 to 2010. From July 2010 to September 2012, he worked for his current 
employer in State 2. He returned to State 1 in September 2012 to care for his mother, 
who was ill. He worked there until his employment contract ended in July 2013. Applicant 
then worked for a casino (July to November 2013). He was then unemployed for three 
months, until he was re-hired by his current employer in February 2014. He remains 
employed there, though he now lives in State 3. He currently rents his home. (Items 3, 4; 
FORM Response)  
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for over 20 years. He reported on his 
December 2014 security clearance application (SCA) that he was granted security 
clearances in 1997, 2007 and 2011. (Item 3). 
 
 The SOR concerns five delinquent accounts. SOR ¶ 1.a ($35,579) is a second 
mortgage that was charged off in 2009. SOR ¶1.b concerns a mortgage that was 
foreclosed in 2014. SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e are three small medical debts totaling about 
$840. (Items 2, 6) The medical debts are paid and resolved. (FORM Response). Applicant 
disclosed the two mortgage debts on his SCA, and discussed all his debts fully in his 
background interview. (Items 3, 4)   
 
3 
 
 
Applicant and his wife bought a home (House 1) in 2004. He refinanced in 2006, 
adding a second mortgage. In July 2007, he purchased a home that was much closer to 
his job on the military base (House 2). He was able to rent out House 1 for about a year, 
but fell behind on the mortgage when the renters moved out. He attempted a short sale 
but the home was foreclosed on in 2009. The second mortgage was charged off in 2009. 
This foreclosure occurred before Applicant’s most recent clearance adjudication, in 2011. 
Applicant disclosed the foreclosure on his 2014 SCA, and contacted the creditor. They 
confirmed the status of the account but did not provide anything in writing. (Items 4, 5, 6; 
FORM Response) (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
 
 Applicant purchased House 2 in July 2007. He lost his job in November 2013, and 
soon fell behind on the mortgage payments. He was unable to sell it, and the home was 
foreclosed on in July 2014. Applicant’s credit reports show that the account has a zero 
balance. (SOR ¶ 1.b) No other delinquencies are indicated. (Items 4, 5, 6) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.12 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”13 
 
 The AGs are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors 
listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person 
concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain 
a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
                                                          
12 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”).  
 
13 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.14 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable: (a) inability to satisfy debts; and (c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are established by the record. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed in the defense industry, with a security 
clearance, for many years. He had two home foreclosures, in 2009 and 2014, and he 
candidly disclosed both during his application process. The first foreclosure occurred after 
he was unable to find stable renters. The second occurred after he lost his job. Both 
circumstances were beyond his control. The second mortgage from his first home (SOR 
¶ 1.a) was charged off in 2009. Applicant undertook reasonable efforts to resolve the 
foreclosure at the time. More recently, the creditor confirmed to Applicant that the account 
was charged off, but did not provide anything in writing.15 SOR ¶ 1.b, the account relating 
to the second foreclosure, has a zero balance, so it is resolved. His financial issues are 
unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
15 Applicant also asserts in his FORM Response that SOR ¶ 1.a is covered by his state statute of limitations. 
Even if so, the DOHA Appeal Board has long held that security clearance decisions are not controlled or 
limited by such statutes of limitation. A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a delinquent debt is legally unenforceable 
under state law, the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an 
applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). As discussed above, while several mitigating conditions apply, the 
state statute of limitations has limited mitigating value.  
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered the factors that led to 
Applicant’s financial issues and the steps he took to rectify them. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for continued access to classified information is granted. 
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
