KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: We remand the case to the Judge for him to give the parties an opportunity to address
the potential applicability of Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g)  and issue a new Decision in accordance
with the Directive. Other issues raised by Applicant are not ripe for consideration. Adverse
decision remanded.
CASENO: 16-00517.a1
DATE: 09/08/2017
DATE: September 8, 2017
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00517
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May
31, 2016,1 DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On June 7, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
1The copy of the SOR contained in the record is undated.  We have derived this date from the cover letter to
Applicant that accompanied the SOR.  
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process
and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we remand the case to the Judge.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
A retired career military officer, Applicant experienced underemployment from October
2014 to March 2016, when he began his current job as a Defense contractor.  As a consequence,
Applicant has experienced financial problems.  He also stated that his difficulties were affected by
commuting expenses, additional living expenses necessitated by a job relocation, increased utilities
expenses, the costs of his child’s extracurricular activities, and trips for family health concerns.  The
SOR listed a number of delinquent debts, most of which the Judge resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
However, two debts–past-due taxes to the IRS and a wage garnishment–resulted in the adverse
decision that Applicant is appealing.
Applicant did not disclose his tax delinquencies on his security clearance application,
although he did so during his subsequent clearance interview.  While he stated that he was on a
payment plan with the IRS to pay $12,000 in taxes for 2008, additional evidence showed that in fact
he owed over $20,000 for 2009 through 2015.  He also owes about $1,800 to his state tax authorities. 
Applicant is currently paying the IRS through a garnishment from his wife’s wages.  If the payment
is increased to a certain amount, then the IRS will consider establishing an installment plan
agreement.  
Applicant and his wife earned a fairly high income during this period.  Their current net
monthly income is nearly $11,000 and their positive net remainder after expenses is nearly $900. 
Applicant now has more funds available to him because he is no longer budgeting for his child’s
college expenses.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted that Applicant’s payments to the IRS have “not been purely voluntary,”
insofar as they have been accomplished through garnishment.  The Judge stated that Applicant’s
circumstances suggest that he has a problem complying with governmental rules and regulations. 
The Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s underemployment but also concluded that, on the whole,
he had the means to pay his tax debt, given his and his wife’s combined incomes.  He concluded that
Applicant’s tax problems create doubt about his trustworthiness and good judgment.
Discussion
Applicant notes that the Decision was issued one day before the effective date of the new
Adjudicative Guidelines promulgated by the Federal Government.  He states that the Judge should
have considered these updated Guidelines in analyzing his case for mitigation, specifically,
Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 20(g) (“[T]he individual has made arrangements with the appropriate
tax authority to . . . pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”  He
contends that  payments to the IRS through garnishment of his wife’s wages are sufficient to raise
the applicability of this mitigating condition.  We note Applicant’s testimony that he is seeking an
installment plan with the IRS but so far has not been able to reach an agreement as to the amount. 
In the meantime, the garnishment action remains in effect.  The Judge found that, were the garnished
amount to be increased from its current level to $241 per pay period, the IRS would then consider
entering into an installment plan.  Decision at 5.  Under the facts of this case, a similarly situated
applicant might have raised the applicability of 20(g) at the hearing as part of his or her case in
mitigation.  
Given that mitigating condition 20(g) was not in force at the time the Judge completed his
Decision, his failure to have addressed it is not surprising and cannot plausibly be attributed to error
on his part.  However, through no fault of the Judge’s own, the Decision as it stands does not adhere
to the procedures currently mandated by the Directive.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.2.  See also ISCR
Case No. 00-0489 at 8 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2002) (Security clearance decisions must be based on
current, not past, DoD policies and standards).  Accordingly, we remand the case to the Judge for
him to give the parties an opportunity to address the potential applicability of this mitigating
condition and issue a new Decision in accordance with the Directive.  Other issues raised by
Applicant are not ripe for consideration.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.     
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
