 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03441 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 16, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 2017, scheduling the 
hearing for June 27, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. The record was held open until August 30, 2017, for Applicant to 
submit additional evidence. He did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2015. He has a General Educational Development 
(GED) high school equivalency certificate, and he has technical certifications. He 
married in 1998 and divorced in 2006. He has an eight-year-old child.1 
 
Applicant has worked in information technology for more than 25 years, primarily 
as a consultant or in contract positions. As such, he had periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, which resulted in financial difficulties. He suffers from a chronic 
disease, and he helped care for his mother before she passed away in 2015. He also 
admitted he was “very poor at handling finances.” A number of debts became 
delinquent, and his home was lost to foreclosure.2 
 
 The SOR alleges a $4,750 unpaid judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a); the underlying $4,172 
debt that resulted in that judgment (SOR ¶ 1.i); $1,478 owed in child support arrearages 
(SOR ¶ 1.g); and eight miscellaneous delinquent debts totaling $18,937. Applicant 
admitted that he owed all of the debts at one time, but he stated that some of the debts 
have been paid, and he is paying others. All of the debts are listed on at least one credit 
report.3 
 
 Applicant is current on his child support. He settled the $454 telecommunications 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. He paid $180 to settle a $603 debt that was not alleged in 
the SOR. He agreed to pay $150 per month towards the $4,750 unpaid judgment (SOR 
¶ 1.a). He made a $150 payment on April 28, 2017. He missed his May payment 
because of the expenses related to a move to a cheaper apartment. He stated, without 
documentation, that he made the June payment. He stated that the balance of the 
judgment is $5,750, with interest. He stated, without documentation, that he settled the 
$339 utilities debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, and he paid or settled the $232 
telecommunications debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h.4  
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $90,000 in an area that does not have a high cost of 
living. He makes regular trips to another state to visit his child, which he described as “a 
drain on [his] finances.” He stated that he lives paycheck to paycheck. He was informed 
of the importance of documenting his payments, but he submitted nothing post-hearing. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24, 29-31, 58-59; GE 1, 2.  
 
2 Tr. at 20-24, 27-28, 31-33, 41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. The SOR did not allege the 
foreclosure. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It 
may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4; AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 24-27, 36-53; GE 3, 4; AE B-D.  
 
 
3 
 
He stated that he was “really bad at finances and looking at the finances tends to put 
[him] into an anxiety thing.”5 He explained his current financial situations as follows: 
 
I do try to live within my means. I don’t know how to budget. I’m very bad 
at that, very poor at that. I probably could take a class or two on that, and 
that more than likely would assist me. I’m just here to try and prove that 
I’m trying to do the best I possibly can to repay these debts and get them 
behind me.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 34-37, 40-41, 46-47, 53-63, 67-68; AE A, B.  
 
6 Tr. at 30.  
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, and he accrued multiple delinquent 
debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a $4,172 debt, which was the basis for the $4,750 judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3. SOR ¶ 1.i is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
5 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment and 
underemployment, his chronic disease, and caring for his mother before she passed 
away in 2015. Applicant also admitted he was “very poor at handling finances.”  
 
Applicant is credited with bringing his child support current (SOR ¶ 1.g); settling 
the $454 telecommunications debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e; and making a $150 payment 
towards the unpaid judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a). He also paid $180 to settle a $603 debt that 
was not alleged in the SOR. He stated, without documentation, that he paid or settled 
other debts. He was informed of the importance of documentation, and he was given 
more than two months to submit additional documentary evidence, but he failed to 
submit anything. The Appeal Board has held that “it is reasonable for a Judge to expect 
applicants to present documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR 
Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 
3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG 
¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
only applicable to Applicant’s child support obligations and the settled 
telecommunications debt. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite 
the presence of some mitigation.  
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
