1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No. 16-00694 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
September 1, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant is indebted to seven creditors in the approximate amount of $88,000. 
He failed to produce documentation to show he resolved any of his delinquencies. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On June 15, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 2.) On July 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2016. (Item 1.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On September 15, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on September 16, 2016, and received by him on 
September 27, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on October 14, 2016. I marked his submission 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and it was admitted without objection. DOHA assigned the 
case to me on August 2, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence.  
 
Due to the passage of time since Applicant responded to the FORM, and the 
implementation of the new SEAD 4 AG during that period, I notified both parties on 
August 18, 2017, that I would reopen the record, in order to permit submission of any 
desired new evidence or argument. In particular, I noted that anything addressing 
Applicant’s subsequent adherence to his plan to file for bankruptcy would be pertinent 
under the new language of the mitigating factor in AG ¶ 20(d), which added the 
language, “and is adhering to.” On August 28, 2017, Applicant responded with a letter 
and a credit report dated August 28, 2017. Department Counsel had no objection to this 
evidence, which is marked AE B, and is admitted together with the associated email 
correspondence. The record closed on August 29, 2017, after Applicant indicated he 
had nothing further to submit. 
 
I considered the previous eligibility guidelines, as well as the new SEAD 4 AG, in 
adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the currently 
effective SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and married. He has three children. He has worked for 
his current employer, a government contractor, since June 2015. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to seven creditors in the approximate 
amount of $88,094. Applicant admitted to the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.g, with clarifications. Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports dated June 27, 2015; 
and June 3, 2016. (Items 4 and 5.) Applicant attributed his delinquencies to the failure of 
his remodeling business during the 2007 and 2008 financial crisis. (Item 1; AE A; AE B.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a judgment in the amount of $3,029, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. This judgment was filed in August 2009. Applicant produced no 
documentation of actions taken to resolve this debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 4; Item 
5.)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off automobile loan in the amount of 
$3,461, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. This was for a “business vehicle” that was 
repossessed. Applicant’s August 28, 2017 credit report reflects this debt as 
“collections/charge-off.” It remains delinquent. (AE B; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $38,712, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt was for equipment that Applicant leased for his 
business. He claimed the equipment was repossessed. However, his June 2016 credit 
report reflects a balance of $38,712, which has been delinquent since 2010. This debt is 
unresolved. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off credit card account in the amount of 
$3,164, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant claimed that he is making court-ordered 
payments on this debt and the balance has declined to $1,984.27, as of the date of his 
Answer. However, he failed to produce documentation to support this claim. This debt is 
unresolved. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $31,536, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant explained in his Answer that this debt was for a 
“business line of credit.” Applicant produced no documentation of actions taken to 
resolve this debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $8,013, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. Applicant produced no documentation of actions taken to resolve 
this debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on a collection account in the amount of $179, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.g. Applicant produced no documentation of actions taken to resolve this 
debt. It remains unresolved. (Item 5.)  
 
 In Applicant’s Response, he indicated that he had consulted an attorney about 
his delinquent debts and planned to file for bankruptcy. (AE A.) However, in his most 
recent submission he indicated: 
 
With my credit greatly improved, what looks like all the credit issues of the 
past removed from my credit report (at least on what I can see on [C]redit 
Karma), and because of the age of the debts and can no longer be sued 
[sic], I feel like filing for bankruptcy would be a huge setback for another 
10 years if it is not an absolute necessity. It may still be how we move 
forward bit [sic] I need to sit down again with Council [sic] and re-assess. 
(AE B.) 
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. However, Applicant has no new 
delinquent accounts reflected on his August 2017 credit report. (AE B.) No character 
 
 
4 
 
 
references were submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, 
or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is indebted to seven creditors in an amount exceeding $88,000. He has 
documented no action to resolve these delinquencies. The facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since the financial downturn in 2007 
through 2008, are unresolved, and continue to date. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s 
business’ failure was due to economic factors beyond his control. However, he did not 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to his 
debt, which is necessary for full mitigation under this condition. He has been fully 
employed since 2015, yet he has not documented steps taken to resolve his SOR-listed 
delinquencies. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to his 
delinquent debts. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those 
debts in the record. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature 
individual who is accountable for the decisions and choices that led to his continued 
 
 
7 
 
 
financial difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, 
or permanent behavioral change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial 
irresponsibility. While his credit report reflects no new delinquencies, he has done little 
to resolve his SOR-listed debts.  
 
Applicant argues in AE B that the fact the SOR-listed debts no longer appear on 
his credit report means they no longer have security significance. He is incorrect.  
 
Evidence that a debt is not legally collectable through operation of law 
does not preclude a Judge from considering whether the circumstances 
underlying the debt impugn an applicant’s judgment or reliability. By the 
same token, evidence that an unresolved debt has dropped from an 
applicant’s credit report does not preclude a Judge from considering its 
significance. See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-02206 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2015). 
 
Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts establish continuing potential for 
pressure, coercion, or duress. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude that he did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
