 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04042 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On January 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.2 The SOR 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated March 30, 2016). 
 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed 
reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 13, 2017. On February 20, 2017, he 
responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 23, 
2017. The case was assigned to me on May 26, 2017.  A Notice of Hearing was issued 
on August 4, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 2017. 
 
 During the hearing, 3 Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, and 13 Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE M were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 1, 2017. I kept the record open 
to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely 
submitted several documents, which were marked and admitted as AE N through AE S, 
without objection. The record closed on September 13, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant failed to admit or deny any of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.) of the SOR, 
although he offered comments regarding each allegation. During the hearing, Applicant 
stated that he had intended to admit all of the allegations.3 Applicant’s admissions and 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a truck 
driver with the company since May 2016. He previously held positions with other 
employers as an operator or senior mechanic recovery element. From January 2001 until 
January 2010, he was self-employed purchasing, selling, transporting, and exporting 
vehicles. He is a recipient of a 1990 General Educational Development (GED) diploma, 
and he has received some vocational training, but no advanced degrees. Applicant has 
never served in the U.S. military. He has never been granted a security clearance. 
Applicant was married in August 1991. He has a daughter, born in February 1992 
(currently enrolled in a master’s program), and a son, born in October 1997 (currently on 
active duty with the U.S. Air Force).  
                                                          
2 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
3 Tr. at 13-15. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations4 
It is unclear when Applicant first started experiencing financial problems. In 2007, 
when the economy was “pretty good,” Applicant was busy buying, selling, and exporting 
vehicles. Two years later, the economy faltered and exports slowed down to a point where 
he had unsold inventory. At about the same time, Applicant’s mortgage payments on his 
residence ballooned up from $1,300 per month to $2,700 per month. When his daughter 
graduated from high school, Applicant was confronted with a choice: keep a motorcycle 
or maintain his family and household. Applicant chose the latter option. In an attempt to 
generate additional funds to help his family, Applicant obtained employment with a 
company that sent him overseas. From January 2010 until February 2011, Applicant was 
stationed in a combat zone in Iraq where he served as a senior mechanic recovery 
element, picking up damaged or destroyed military vehicles. During his service in Iraq, 
Applicant came under hostile fire every three or four missions. Applicant subsequently 
joined his current employer, essentially taking a pay cut, but he was afforded more 
stability, benefits, and time at home. 
On September 4, 2017, Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement to 
reflect his monthly income; monthly expenses; or any monthly remainder that might be 
available for discretionary spending or savings. His net monthly income is $4,500.76, and 
his monthly expenses are $3,780, leaving a monthly remainder of $720.76.5 Other than 
one collection account alleged in the SOR as unpaid (SOR ¶ 1.b.), and listed in a recent 
Equifax credit report as unpaid, and one account alleged in the SOR as unpaid (SOR ¶ 
1.a.), but not listed in his recent credit report,6 Applicant has no other delinquent accounts.  
The SOR identified three purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed 
for collection or charged off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s May 2016 credit report. 
Those debts total approximately $19,764. The current status of the three accounts, 
according to the credit reports, other evidence submitted by the Government and 
Applicant, and Applicant’s comments regarding same, is that two of the debts have been 
resolved by settlements and payments, and the third debt is currently being negotiated 
for possible settlement. The debts are as follows. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): In October 2007, Applicant purchased the above-referenced 
motorcycle for $26,927, requiring monthly payments of $430. Two years later, with the 
faltering economy and an unsold inventory, and his mortgage payments increasing, he 
called the motorcycle company to discuss the possibility of lowering his payments, but 
that offer was rejected. Applicant voluntarily surrendered the motorcycle to the dealership 
in September 2009.7 Applicant eventually relocated to Iraq, and also changed his 
                                                          
4 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: GE 1, supra note 1; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated August 31, 2016); GE 3 (Combined Experian, 
TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated May 27, 2016); and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated February 20, 
2017.  
 
5 AE S (Personal Financial Statement, dated September 4, 2017). 
 
6 AE O (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 23, 2017), at 33. 
 
7 AE R (Letter, dated August 28, 2017). 
 
4 
                                      
 
residence address. Until recently, he never received written acknowledgment that the 
motorcycle had been repossessed, and he was never informed that he had a deficiency 
remaining. He never received a charge-off notice, collection letters, a Form 1099-C, or 
auction sales information. Although Applicant had made monthly payments for the period 
that he owned and possessed the motorcycle, when the value of the motorcycle was 
raised by him, the motorcycle company gave him credit for only $7,000. Applicant 
contended that the book value for the same year and model was $20,000. He first learned 
that there was a deficiency when he was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in August 2016. The creditor reported the unpaid 
balance as $18,660 – the same amount that was charged off in December 2009.  
During his OPM interview, Applicant acknowledged that he had made no effort to 
resolve the account, and stated that he would make no effort to do so.8 Applicant disputed 
the account with the credit reporting agencies, and it was removed from Equifax.9 On 
September 1, 2017, the collection agent informed Applicant that it was authorized to settle 
the account for a lump-sum payment of $5,600, provided that payment was made no later 
than September 8, 2017.10 The settlement offer was modified by the collection agent, and 
it offered a payment plan calling for six months of payments for $938, totaling $5,628.11 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation to support proof of any such plan or 
payments. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.): These refer to two medical accounts with unpaid balances 
of $694 and $410 that were placed for collection. Applicant reached out to the only listed 
collection agent and he was told there was only one delinquent medical account under 
his Social Security number, date of birth, or address, and it was in the amount of $211.40. 
On August 8, 2017, Applicant paid the collection agent $211.40 – the remaining balance 
on the account(s).12 While the two accounts appear separately in Applicant’s May 2016 
Equifax credit report, only one account for $211 appears in his August 2017 Equifax credit 
report. The account(s) have been resolved. Applicant acknowledged that if the bills had 
actually been $694 and $410, he would have paid those balances as well. 
There is no evidence of financial counseling. Nevertheless, Applicant has made 
significant progress in stabilizing his finances and avoiding other financial delinquencies. 
He resolved two of the SOR accounts and is focusing on the one remaining delinquent 
SOR account, the one related to the motorcycle. Applicant’s finances are under control. 
  
                                                          
 
8 GE 2, supra note 4, at 5. 
 
9 AE M (Equifax Credit Report Review, dated February 12, 2017); Tr. at 34. 
 
10 AE P (Letter, dated September 1, 2017). 
 
11 AE N (E-mail, dated September 5, 2017). 
 
12 AE C (Letter, dated August 8, 2017). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 The commander and the command sergeant major of the task force recovery team 
in Iraq presented Applicant with a certificate of appreciation for his meritorious and 
selfless service and willingness to take on all risks assigned to the recovery team.13 In 
2016, Applicant was presented with The President’s Volunteer Service Award in 
recognition and appreciation for his commitment to strengthen the nation and 
communities through volunteer service.14 In 2016 and 2017, he was also awarded a 
variety of awards and recognitions for his service to his employers and coworkers.15 
Applicant’s senior program manager and his program lead are both very supportive of 
him. His senior program manager noted that in 2016 alone, Applicant had recorded over 
200 volunteer hours. Since he joined the company, Applicant was named the employee 
of the month for his department. Applicant has been identified as an employee with great 
potential for positions of greater responsibility with the company as a result of his superb 
work ethic.16  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
                                                          
13 HE F (Certificate of Appreciation, dated July 10, 2010). 
 
14 AE D (Certificate, dated 2016); AE E (Letter, undated). 
 
15 AE G (Certificate, dated November 30, 2016); AE H (Certificate, dated July 25, 2017); AE I (Certificate, 
dated August 10, 2017); AE J (Certificate, dated June 28, 2017); AE K (Certificate, dated July 12, 2017). 
 
16 AE A (Character Reference, dated April 14, 2017). 
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
19 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
22 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. In addition, AG ¶ 
19(b) may apply if there is an “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do 
so.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
concerns. Applicant voluntarily surrendered a motorcycle to the dealer for repossession, 
and he failed to pay the remaining deficiency. The account was placed for collection. 
According to his 2016 credit report, two medical accounts became delinquent and they 
too were placed for collection. At one point, Applicant expressed a position that he would 
make no effort to resolve the motorcycle deficiency. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) have 
been established. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG ¶ 
20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, 
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence that “the individual has received 
or is receiving financial counseling for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, 
such as a non-profit credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated and is 
 
8 
                                      
 
adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”23 
In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.”  
I have concluded that ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) all partially or fully 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s financial issues make it difficult 
to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent.” Applicant’s financial 
situation differs somewhat from the normal financial issues in that, when he was 
confronted with the deteriorating economy that left him with unsold inventory, Applicant 
immediately took steps to forestall or avoid any financial difficulties by reducing expenses 
and volunteering for service in a dangerous combat zone in Iraq to generate additional 
income. While he was overseas, and thereafter until he was informed by the OPM 
investigator that there were continuing issues with regard to the motorcycle, Applicant 
was unaware that there was a deficiency remaining. He never received a charge-off 
notice, collection letters, a Form 1099-C, or auction sales information. Once he learned 
of the reported deficiency amount, he disputed that amount. He initially indicated he would 
make no effort to resolve the account, but later altered his intention. The account was 
removed from his Equifax credit report. Negotiations then ensued with the collection 
agent. Seemingly acknowledging that the deficiency was perhaps too high, in September 
2017, the collection agent informed Applicant that it was authorized to settle the account 
for a lump-sum payment of $5,600, provided that payment was made no later than 
September 8, 2017. The settlement offer was modified by the collection agent, and it 
recently offered a payment plan calling for six months of payments for $938, totaling 
$5,628. It is unclear what actions will result from that latest offer.  
Applicant turned his focus on the two other accounts alleged in the SOR. Those 
two medical accounts were resolved when Applicant paid off the remaining balance that 
the listed collection agent had indicated for the account(s). While there is no evidence 
that Applicant received financial counseling, his August 2017 Equifax credit report reflects 
no other delinquent accounts. Applicant has made significant progress in stabilizing his 
finances and avoiding other financial delinquencies. Applicant’s finances are under 
control. 
                                                          
23 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action 
aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, 
the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 
99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time.  
 
It is clear that Applicant now has funds remaining at the end of each month for 
discretionary use or savings, and there is evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. When confronted with the issues that caused his financial 
problems, Applicant acted responsibly by seeking information from his creditors or 
collection agents.24 Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.25 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.26   
                                                          
24 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing 
with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
25 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
26 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
10 
                                      
 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Three accounts, 
totaling $19,764 became delinquent and were placed for collection or charged off. He has 
not resolved one of his debts, the largest one associated with his repossessed motorcycle. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
There is no evidence of misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling 
protected information. His son is on active duty with the U.S. military. Applicant is a well-
respected individual who voluntarily took an assignment in a combat zone in Iraq, risking 
his life as part of his duties on behalf of U.S. combat forces in Iraq picking up damaged 
or destroyed military vehicles. During his service in Iraq, Applicant came under hostile fire 
every three or four missions. These circumstances increase the probability that Applicant 
will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit him.27 Applicant’s honorable service as a contractor, 
including his service in Iraq, and his desire for continued employment, weigh heavily 
towards approval of his security clearance. His supervisors and colleagues are 
supportive. Once he became aware of the three delinquent accounts, he promptly 
resolved two of them and started negotiations with regard to the remaining debt. The 
remaining issues surrounding that debt involve the accuracy and appropriateness of the 
remaining balance. Although the reported deficiency was $18,660, Applicant disputed that 
amount. The debt was removed from Applicant’s credit report. Nevertheless, in a good-
faith effort to resolve the issue, Applicant entered into negotiations with the collection 
agent. The proposed settlement balance is approximately $5,600. Applicant has a 
substantial monthly remainder, and his financial situation is under control.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:28 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
                                                          
 
27 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a positive track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts. His August 2017 credit report has only one negative account (SOR ¶ 
1.b.) and nine accounts that are reported as “pays as agreed” or “paid and closed.” With 
the exception of the motorcycle debt, Applicant has no other delinquent accounts. He has 
a substantial monthly remainder, and his financial situation is under control. This decision 
should serve as a warning that Applicant’s failure to continue his resolution efforts with 
respect to his unresolved motorcycle debt, or the actual accrual of new delinquent debts, 
will adversely affect his future eligibility for a security clearance.29 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
29 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant as security officials may continue to monitor his 
finances, this decision, including the warning, should not be interpreted as a conditional eligibility to hold a security 
clearance. Failure to comply with payment plans or other delinquent debt will raise a security concern. The Government 
has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances. The Government can re-validate 
Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance 
now does not bar the Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. While the Defense office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) does not have the authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance, the 
Government has the right to reconsider the security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent 
conduct having negative security significance. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). ISCR 
Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006).  
