 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02908 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
September 13, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on a Federal tax lien entered against him 
in 2014, in the amount of $38,114. He was also alleged to have failed to satisfy a collection 
account in the amount of $1,395. He has resolved his Federal tax debt and the collection 
account. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators could 
not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on April 17, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
4, 2017, scheduling the hearing for July 26, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented six documents, 
which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. They were admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and 1.b. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since August 2015. He is married, and has two 
children, ages 16 and 21. (GE 1; Tr. 16-18.) 
  
  Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a Federal tax lien filed against him in 2014 
in the amount of $38,114. This debt was the result of unpaid payroll taxes from 2011, 
2012, and 2013, that accrued as his rental car business slowly failed. It closed in 2013. 
During those years, he made small payments when he could and attempted to contact 
agents from the IRS, and make an installment agreement on this debt, but he received 
no return calls. (Tr. 23, 42-43.) As a result, he hired an advertised “Tax Expert” in 2014 
to negotiate an installment agreement with the IRS on his behalf. He testified: 
 
I tried to make a settlement as soon as possible. I called [Tax Experts] to 
get the installment plan. But there was a delay. Because the business tax 
was tied to my personal name. The business was not formed as a 
corporation. It was strictly under my name. . . So they had a hard time pulling 
information from the IRS. And I told them, then can we - - can I contact the 
IRS to find out the information for you guys? . . . for [Tax Experts]? But they 
said, it’s not recommended. They said, it’s in the process. It’s a work in 
progress. And then you will get a phone call from us regarding the tax 
installment plan soon. But it took almost two years to get . . . And then I 
asked them then can I at least make a payment to the IRS? Because the 
interest is going up every month, every day. And they said to hold onto it 
until we get the installment plan, So I was - - that’s why there was a delay 
on that. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Frustrated that the Tax Experts had taken his money for three years without result, 
Applicant decided to refinance his home mortgage and pay off the tax lien in full.2 
Applicant produced documentation that shows this debt was paid in full on June 14, 2017, 
                                                          
2 Applicant had substantial equity in his home. The refinance actually lowered his monthly mortgage 
payment, because the interest rate was lower. (Tr. 49.) 
 
3 
 
and the lien has been released. He paid and filed his 2016 Federal Income tax returns in 
a timely manner. (AE A; Tr. 20-28.) 
  
 Applicant was alleged to have failed to satisfy a collection account in the amount 
of $1,395. He incurred this debt as the result of an early termination fee and unreturned 
equipment on a merchant account related to his failed business. Applicant had been 
disputing this debt with the creditor, because he was also being charged for unreturned 
equipment, which he believed he had returned. Despite his dispute, Applicant paid this 
debt in full. It is resolved. (AE B; Tr. 28-32.) 
 
 Applicant estimated that his net worth is $250,000. He follows a budget and he 
intends to closely monitor his finances to avoid delinquencies in the future. (Tr. 32-39, 54-
55.) 
 
 Applicant is respected by those that wrote letters on his behalf. His supervisor finds 
him sincere, hardworking, and an asset to the team. His coworkers report he is reliable 
and “willing to go above and beyond.” He has an exceptional work ethic and is considered 
to be trustworthy. (AE D.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
4 
 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  A Federal tax lien was entered against Applicant in 2014 for unpaid payroll taxes, 
from 2011, 2012, and 2013, in the amount of $38,114. He was also indebted on a 
collection account in the amount of $1,395. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were the result of a business downturn. That decline 
led Applicant to close his business and incur debt. He was unable to resolve his Federal 
tax debt and an early termination fee at the time of the business’ failure. He did his best 
to address the Federal tax debt, first by trying to work with the IRS himself through 2014, 
and then hiring a tax advisor to help him in 2014 through 2017. He relied on the “Tax 
Expert” during that time frame and followed its advice. However, he was disappointed in 
the poor results of that Tax Expert and chose to resolve the debt in full in 2017. He had a 
legitimate dispute relating to returned equipment with other business debt, but decided to 
pay it in full. Under the circumstances, Applicant has acted responsibly. He made a good 
faith effort to repay his debts. His budget shows that he can afford all of his current 
expenses. Future financial problems are unlikely. All of the above mitigating conditions 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished work history and is respected by those that wrote 
letters on his behalf. He performs well at his job. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
