 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00103 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Steven J. Krupa, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $121,000 in delinquent debt over the past 25 years, 
most of which she has been unable or unwilling to repay despite repeated statements 
that she would do so. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a 
review of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 25, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 17, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 10, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on September 20, 2016. I granted 
Applicant’s request for a continuance on November 11, 2016, and DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 27, 2017, setting the hearing for May 16, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through U into evidence. One witness 
also testified for Applicant. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until June 5, 2017, to permit submission of 
additional evidence. On May 22, 2017, Applicant submitted another exhibit, which was 
marked AE V and admitted, without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on May 31, 2017.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as a staff analyst by a U.S. defense contractor, and is 
applying for a security clearance in connection with that work. She admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. She denied being delinquent in 
repaying the student loan debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g because it had been placed in 
deferment status after she enrolled in more college classes. (Answer.) Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated in the findings below.  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She has never married and has no children. She 
incurred substantial student loan debts while attending classes at universities in two 
different states during the 1990s, but did not complete a degree. She has served no 
military or Federal government service, and this is her first application for a security 
clearance. She has worked, as a subcontractor and direct employee, in her current 
position since August 2011. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; AE Q; Tr. 48-49, 65-66.)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e alleged five delinquent state-program student loans that 
Applicant entered into from 1994 through 1998, totaling an estimated $96,000. 
Payments on these loans were deferred until July 2005, at which time she was 
voluntarily unemployed and “in Italy finishing a study abroad program.” (GE 1 at 18-19.) 
Her April 2015 credit report showed the last activity on these loans occurred in October 
 
 
 
 
3 
2010, with a total balance due of $51,051. (GE 1.) She said on her March 2015 e-QIP 
that she would negotiate a repayment plan for these debts. During her November 2015 
OPM security interview, she said that she would start repaying these loans in 2016. In 
her August 2016 Answer she reported that these debts had been cancelled by the state 
as uncollectable on May 11, 2016. This debt cancellation was duly reported to the IRS 
on a Form 1099-C, in the total principal and interest amount of $81,936. (GE 1; GE 2; 
GE 3; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s extra taxable 2016 income of almost $82,000 from this debt 
cancellation resulted in $21,213 in Federal income tax obligations that she could not 
afford to pay. On May 17, 2017, after her hearing, she completed an online payment 
agreement with the IRS calling for monthly payments of $300, starting July 15, 2017. 
She documented no payments under this agreement. (Answer; AE A; AE J; AE K; AE V; 
Tr. 51-53, 60-63, 68-69.)  
 
  SOR ¶ 1.f alleged a delinquent $4,418 credit card account, which was opened in 
2007 and exclusively used by Applicant’s mother until 2011, but included Applicant as 
an authorized user. Applicant has never used that credit card or been contacted by the 
creditor for payment, but the account appears on her credit report. During her security 
interview, she said that she would pay the debt if her mother did not. In her Answer, she 
said that she would assume responsibility for the debt and make payments over the 
next five months to pay it. She testified during her hearing that it was not her debt and 
she had not made payments toward it. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; AE G; Tr. 55-56, 64-65.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g alleged Applicant’s delinquent consolidated Federal student loans, 
which she entered into between 1995 and 1998, totaling $69,773. These were placed 
for collection with a past-due amount of $956 in 2006, but were deferred in May 2014 
when Applicant enrolled in more college classes. The deferment will end sometime 
between August 2017 and March 2018, at which time she will owe payments of at least 
$667 per month. She said that she made some payments, at that rate, toward the 
accruing interest between August 2016 and March 2017. However, she provided no 
documentation, from her bank or the creditor, showing that the payments were made or 
received. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Answer; AE L; AE M; Tr. 40-43, 53-54, 62, 69-71.) 
 
 The two delinquencies alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i involve $462 and $114 
medical debts that Applicant incurred in 2008 and 2013, which were placed for 
collection in 2010 and 2014. She reported these debts on her March 2015 e-QIP, and 
said that she would pay them by the end of that month. During her November 2015 
OPM interview, she said that she would start making payments toward these debts by 
the end of that month. After receiving the SOR, she finally paid these two debts on July 
21, 2016. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; AE C; Tr. 54-55, 59-60.)  
 
 Applicant underwent a financial counseling session with an accredited non-profit 
credit counseling organization, and submitted the resulting analysis and budget 
documents dated May 8, 2017. The budget reflected a current monthly surplus of $875, 
with a pending surplus of $209 after her $666 student loan payment begins. The budget 
 
 
 
 
4 
did not reflect any payments toward the IRS deficiency, toward which she subsequently 
agreed to pay $300 per month starting in July 2017. (AE H; Tr. 52-53.)  
 
 Applicant submitted an interim performance evaluation covering the first half of 
2016 that reported she met expectations. She submitted good-character letters from a 
supervisor, a coworker, a former employer and current friend, and her sister. The 
coworker also testified at the hearing. All of these people hold responsible positions, 
and described their high opinions of Applicant’s character, integrity, reliability, and ability 
to properly deal with sensitive information. (AE P through AE U; Tr. 31-38.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
 
 
 
 
5 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been employed in her current position since August 2011. She 
failed to document payments to reduce any of the more than $150,000 in delinquent 
debts, which she said she would resolve in her e-QIP, until paying $576 in old medical 
debt shortly before submitting her Answer to the SOR. She has been unable or unwilling 
to repay these debts, the largest of which was cancelled as uncollectable and converted 
into more than $21,000 in delinquent Federal income tax liability. These financial issues 
date back over twenty years, and continue. These facts establish prima facie support for 
the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:1  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $21,000 in Federal taxes, which she 
cannot afford to pay, as a result of her failure to repay more than $80,000 in state-
program student loan debt that she incurred almost 20 years ago. She promised the 
IRS to make $300 monthly payments toward this tax debt starting in July 2017. 
Payments of at least $666 per month are due to resume shortly toward more than 
$69,000 in unpaid Federal student loan debt. Her budget, showing an $875 monthly 
surplus, does not contain sufficient funds to add this combined $966 in monthly debt 
payments.  
 
Of additional concern, Applicant started promising that she would resolve her 
delinquent debts when she submitted her e-QIP in March 2015, and also told the OPM 
investigator eight months later that she would start paying them, but made no such 
payments until late July 2016, after she received the SOR. She also said that she would 
repay the credit card debt on the joint account with her mother, but now disavows 
responsibility for that debt. Her repeated failure to follow through on expressed 
                                            
1 Applicant’s failure to pay her 2016 Federal income tax debt occurred after issuance of the SOR. She 
made an online application to repay that debt after her hearing, but documented no payments under that 
proposed agreement. Under these circumstances, neither security concerns under AG ¶ 19(f), nor 
mitigation of such concerns under AG ¶ 20(g), were established as of the close of the record. 
 
 
 
 
7 
intentions to repay her delinquencies, combined with her reported budgetary deficiency  
to be able to afford the payments she now claims she will make, cast doubt on her 
willingness and ability to adhere to her proposed resolution plan. Although Applicant 
engaged in a single session of credit counseling, she did not establish that her financial 
situation is resolved or under control.  
 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of security concerns arising 
from her student loan debts under any of these conditions. She repaid her two 
delinquent medical debts so, other than credibility issues based on her failure to do so 
until the SOR was issued, resulting security concerns were mitigated. Record evidence 
supports her dispute of liability for the credit card balance on her mother’s account 
under AG ¶ 20(e).  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for her choices to incur substantial debt and not repay it. She 
continues to owe more than $90,000 in delinquent debt that she has accumulated over 
the past twenty years and either could not, or chose not to, repay. Colleagues and her 
sister provided strong character references. However, there is insufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation or a track record of compliance with debt-resolution agreements, and the 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the 
evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability 
for a security clearance. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
