1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  (Redacted)  )   ISCR Case No. 16-01252 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana in July 2015 while he held a security clearance. He 
indicated that he would continue to use marijuana if it was legalized under federal law. 
There is an unacceptable risk of recurrence, given he used marijuana with his cohabitant 
girlfriend, and she continued to use marijuana at times in his presence. Applicant was not 
fully candid on his December 2015 security clearance questionnaire in that he concealed 
that he had been placed on probation at work in 2014 for making an unauthorized change 
to software code, but the personal conduct concerns have been mitigated. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 25, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct, and 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 5, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a decision 
on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). On September 14, 2016, the Government submitted a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), consisting of three exhibits: the SOR with Applicant’s response (Item 1); 
Applicant’s December 4, 2015 security clearance application (Item 2); and an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) summary of a January 8, 2016 interview of Applicant (Item 
3). 
 
DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant and instructed him to respond 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on October 7, 2016. He submitted 
no response by the November 6, 2016 deadline for comment and rebuttal evidence. On 
August 10, 2017, I was assigned the case to determine whether it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national security eligibility 
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 3 a summary of an unsworn enhanced 
subject interview of Applicant conducted on January 8, 2016. This document was part of 
the DOD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive, a DOD personnel background report of investigation may be received in 
evidence and considered with an authenticating witness, provided it is otherwise admissible 
under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The interview summary did not bear the 
authentication required for admissibility under AG ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 15-01807 decided on April 19, 2017, the Appeal Board held that it 
was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of personal 
subject interview in the absence of any objection to it or any indication that it contained 
inaccurate information. The applicant in that case had objected on appeal to the accuracy 
of some of the information in a FORM, but had not objected to the interview summary or 
indicated that it was inaccurate in any aspects when she responded to the FORM. 
 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
 Unlike the applicant in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, Applicant did not submit a 
response to the FORM submitted in his case. However, as in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, 
Applicant was provided a copy of the FORM and advised of his opportunity to submit 
objections or material that he wanted the administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, 
the FORM advised Applicant of the following: 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (Item 3) is being provided to the 
Administrative Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this 
case. In your response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can 
comment on whether [the] PSI summary accurately reflects the information 
you provided to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the 
summary clear and accurate. Alternatively, you can object on the ground that 
the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness. If no objections are 
raised in your response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, 
the Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections 
to the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as 
evidence in your case. 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded him if he was represented by legal counsel. He was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that he may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, he was 
advised that he is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by him or proven by Department Counsel and that he has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of his opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summary, to 
comment on the interview summary, and to make any corrections, deletions, or updates to 
the information in the report. He was advised that if he did not respond, the interview 
summary may be considered as evidence in his case. Applicant chose to rely solely on the 
record presented in the FORM, which included the information reflected in the interview 
summary, however disqualifying, mitigating, or exculpatory the information. I cannot 
presume without any evidence that Applicant failed to understand his due process rights or 
obligations under the Directive or that he did not want the summary of his interview 
considered in his case. Accordingly, I accepted Item 3 in the record, subject to issues of 
relevance and materiality in light of the entire record, including Applicant’s admissions to 
the allegations. 
 
Summary of Pleadings 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana in July 2015 after 
being granted a DOD security clearance in March 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he continues 
to associate with his cohabitant girlfriend, who uses marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under 
Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his December 2015 Electronic 
4 
 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) by deliberately failing to disclose that 
he had been removed from a contract, counseled, and placed on probationary status and a 
performance improvement plan by his then employer around April or May 2014 (SOR ¶ 
2.a). When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations and stated with 
respect to his drug use, “I inhaled one.” (Item 1.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s response to the SOR (Item 
1), I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old software developer with a bachelor’s degree awarded in 
December 1988. In December 2005, he began working for his current employer (company 
X), a subsidiary of a defense contractor that is sponsoring him for continued security 
clearance eligibility. He was employed full time until May 2014, when he went part time with 
company X and started working full time for a commercial company involved in digital-
platform development. Applicant has held a DOD secret clearance since March 2006. 
(Items 2-3.) 
 
Applicant and his ex-wife married in January 1989, separated in August 2015, and 
divorced in December 2015. He and his ex-wife had three children together. Their daughter 
is now 22 and their twin sons are 23 years old. (Items 2-3.) Applicant has been in a 
cohabitant personal relationship since August 2015. (Item 2.) 
 
While working full time with company X, Applicant supported a contract on which he 
made unauthorized changes in the program’s software code. He was accused by a 
supervisor on the program of intentionally placing a “bug” in the programming code. As a 
result, Applicant was removed from the contract in April 2014, verbally counseled, and 
placed on probation for “possibly” one month. (Item 2.) There is no evidence that Applicant 
had any other problems at work, although he stopped working full time with the company 
shortly thereafter. 
 
On December 4, 2015, Applicant certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) incorporated within an e-QIP that he completed 
electronically on November 30, 2015. In response to section 13A concerning employment 
activities, Applicant disclosed his employment with company X. He answered “No” to the 
following inquiry concerning that employment: “For this employment, in the last seven (7) 
years have you received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, suspended, or 
disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as a violation of security policy?” In 
response to an inquiry concerning the illegal use of drugs or controlled substances in the 
last seven years, Applicant stated, “I took a single hit of marijuana in July 2015.” He 
admitted that his use of marijuana occurred while he possessed a security clearance. 
Applicant denied any intention to use the drug or any other controlled substance in the 
future, and stated, “It was a one-time thing.”2 (Item 2.) 
                                                 
2 The SF 86 in the record has some legibility issues, likely due to a poor copy, but they do not affect the 
findings in this case. 
5 
 
On January 8, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
OPM. Applicant indicated that due to “oversight,” he had failed to disclose on his e-QIP that 
he was disciplined by company X in April 2014 following accusations that he had willfully 
bugged programming code. Applicant explained that he had made changes to the software 
code to improve the program, but a supervisor on the program saw it as an intentional act 
to place a “bug” in the software. Applicant explained that he was removed from the 
contract, counseled, and placed on probation for “possibly” one month. He denied any 
other employment issues. Concerning his disclosed drug use, Applicant explained that he 
took a single “hit” of marijuana in July 2015 with his cohabitant girlfriend at a national park. 
She provided the drug, and he used it for experimental purposes. Applicant indicated that 
he had no intention of using marijuana in the future because of his security clearance. 
However, he added that he would use marijuana if it became legal to do so under federal 
law. Applicant admitted that his girlfriend continues to use marijuana. Recreational use of 
marijuana is legal in their state, and he has been “around [his girlfriend] when she smokes 
marijuana in town.” Applicant denied any adverse impact on his behavior, judgment, or 
reliability because of his use of marijuana. (Item 3.) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are articulated 
in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
Applicant used marijuana3 with his cohabitant girlfriend while they were at a national 
park in July 2015. While there is no evidence of any illegal drug use by Applicant beyond 
that one time, he used marijuana while he held a DOD security clearance on federal 
property knowing that it was illegal under federal law. AG ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse 
(see above definition),” and AG ¶ 25(f), “any illegal drug use while granted access to 
classified information or holding a sensitive position,” are clearly established. AG ¶ 25(c), 
“illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” applies 
only in that Applicant had physical possession of marijuana when he used it. 
                                                 
3 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. Despite some states providing for medical marijuana use or the 
decriminalization or legalization of recreational use of minor amounts of the drug, marijuana remains a 
Schedule I controlled substance under federal law. Such drugs have a high potential for abuse, no currently 
accepted medical use in treatment in the United States, and lack accepted safety for using the drug under 
medical supervision.   
  
7 
 
 Concerning potentially mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, AG ¶ 26(a) applies in 
that his one-time use can reasonably be characterized as “so infrequent.” AG ¶ 26(a) 
provides: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
However, the circumstances and recency of Applicant’s marijuana use in July 2015 cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He used marijuana within six 
months of completing his e-QIP to renew his security clearance eligibility, despite knowing 
that marijuana use was illegal under federal law. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) provides for mitigation when an individual acknowledges his drug 
involvement and has taken steps to preclude a recurrence: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 Regarding whether Applicant has established a sufficient pattern of abstinence 
under AG ¶ 26(a), the extent to which security concerns may have become attenuated 
because of the passage of time is a question to be resolved based on the evidence as a 
whole. See ISCR 14-01847 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2015). Applicant’s use of marijuana occurred 
only one time, and his candor about his marijuana use on his e-QIP and during his 
enhanced subject interview afford him some credibility on the issue of his stated intention 
not to use any marijuana in the future unless it becomes legal under federal law. Yet, 
Applicant’s use of marijuana in knowing violation of his security clearance eligibility is an 
aggravating factor. He had abstained from marijuana for little more than six months as of 
his subject interview and one year as of his response to the SOR. Of greater concern going 
forward, there is no evidence that his cohabitant girlfriend has ceased her involvement with 
marijuana. She provided the marijuana that they used together in July 2015. Applicant 
acknowledged during his January 2016 interview that he has been around his girlfriend on 
other occasions when she was smoking marijuana. 
 
 The SOR separately alleges drug involvement security concerns because of 
Applicant’s continued association with his cohabitant girlfriend who uses marijuana (SOR ¶ 
1.b). The Appeal Board has held that security-related conduct can be alleged under more 
8 
 
than one guideline, and in an appropriate case, be given independent weight under each 
guideline.4 The DOD is not in the business of dictating a person’s friends and associates. 
Applicant’s continuation of his close personal relationship with a known marijuana user has 
security significance because of his marijuana use, and it is primarily relevant in assessing 
his reform, including whether he is committed to a drug-free lifestyle. Applicant appears to 
have a permissive attitude toward his girlfriend using marijuana in his presence. There is a 
very real risk that Applicant will find himself in situations conducive to relapse in the future. 
He admitted that he would continue to use marijuana if it was legalized under federal law. 
Under the circumstances, insufficient time has passed to guarantee that his marijuana use 
will not reoccur. The drug involvement and substance misuse security concerns are not 
adequately mitigated. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct  
  
The concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15:  
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
Applicant is alleged to have deliberately falsified his December 2015 security 
clearance application by responding “No” to an inquiry concerning whether he had received 
a written warning, been officially reprimanded, or been disciplined for misconduct at work in 
the last seven years (SOR ¶ 2.a). The evidence shows that Applicant disclosed no adverse 
information on his e-QIP concerning his employment with company X. During his enhanced 
subject interview, he indicated that he had been removed from a program and placed on 
probation by the company in April 2014 after he was accused of intentionally programming 
a “bug” in software code without authorization. He attributed his failure to report this 
employment discipline on his e-QIP to “oversight.” Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established when omissions are due to misunderstanding, inadvertent mistake, or other 
cause that could negate the willful intent. That disqualifying condition provides: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When Applicant answered the SOR, he discrepantly admitted the alleged 
falsification, albeit without any explanation. The Appeal Board has explained the process 
for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
                                                 
4 See ISCR 11-06672 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012). 
9 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has 
the burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the 
omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present 
evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 
(App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). Oversight does not adequately explain his failure to disclose that 
he had been disciplined for the unauthorized manipulation of computer software, especially 
when the discipline, including being placed on probation by the company, coincided with 
his transition to part-time employment with the company. He admitted the allegation of 
deliberate falsification when he answered the SOR. Moreover, Applicant was informed in 
the FORM that his falsification of his e-QIP was “anathema to finding him suitable for a 
security clearance.” Applicant chose not to refute or rebut that assertion. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies. 
 
Deliberate misrepresentation or concealment may be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if 
“the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant is credited with admitting 
during his enhanced subject interview that he had not disclosed on his SF 86 that he had 
been disciplined by his employer in April 2014. He provided details about the conduct that 
led him to being placed on probation, albeit claiming that his intent was to improve the 
software code. The summary of his subject interview (Item 3) does not shed light on 
whether he volunteered the information upfront or whether he had first been confronted. 
Furthermore, even if his rectification was reasonably prompt, it was incomplete in that he 
did not acknowledge the intentional nature of his false response his e-QIP. 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” Applicant falsified his SF 86 in one relevant aspect, so it may reasonably be 
considered infrequent. Even so, his false denial of any work-related disciplinary action is 
viewed seriously because he concealed unauthorized conduct. Even assuming that his 
intention was to improve the software program, discipline imposed for unauthorized change 
to programming code is information that could influence a security clearance investigation 
or adjudication. Furthermore, his failure to acknowledge during his OPM interview that he 
intentionally falsified his SF 86 cast some doubt on his good judgment.  
 
AG ¶ 17(d) is implicated by Applicant’s detailed admission in January 2016 about 
his misconduct in 2014 and the discipline imposed, and by his admission in response to 
the SOR that he deliberately falsified his SF 86. AG ¶ 17(d) provides: 
10 
 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors 
that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, 
and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Although Applicant’s lack of full candor on his SF 86 is not condoned, I have little concern 
about his trustworthiness going forward in light of his subsequent rectification about his 
alteration of software code and the fact that he has been forthright about his marijuana 
use. The personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).5 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(a), I have 
to consider Applicant’s age and maturity as well as his status as a cleared employee. By 
using marijuana knowing that it was illegal under federal law, Applicant raised considerable 
doubts about whether he can continue to be relied on to comply with DOD rules and 
requirements, including those concerning the handling and safeguarding of classified 
information.  While the personal conduct concerns caused by his SF 86 falsification have 
largely been mitigated, security concerns persist because of his drug involvement. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). The Government 
must be able to rely on those persons holding security clearance eligibility to fulfill their 
responsibilities consistent with laws, regulations, and policies, and without regard to their 
personal interests. For the reasons discussed, Applicant has raised enough doubt in that 
regard to where I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
                                                 
5 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
11 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
