 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 16-01394 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD acted under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on September 26, 2016. The case was 
assigned to me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 13, 2017, and the hearing was convened 
                                                          
 1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also 
considered this case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my 
conclusions are the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on April 10, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit list 
was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibit (AE) A, 
which was admitted without objection. The record was held open until May 12, 2017, for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE B, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 20, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted some of the SOR allegations with explanations, and denied 
others. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. She has been in her current position with a DOD 
contractor since August 2014. She has a bachelor’s degree. She is twice divorced and 
once widowed. She has four adult children from her first marriage.2  
 
 The SOR alleged a delinquent debt owed on a repossessed vehicle and seven 
collection debts totaling $17,529. The SOR also alleged Applicant deliberately failed to 
list her repossessed vehicle on her October 2014 trustworthiness application. All the 
debts are listed in credit reports from October 2014 and March 2016. She admitted in 
her hearing testimony that with the exception of SOR ¶ 1.g, all the debts remain unpaid. 
She provided documentation showing that SOR ¶ 1.g was paid. She failed to provide 
any evidence showing that she paid the remaining debts, set up payment plans for any 
debts, or contacted the respective creditors. She also failed to document any disputed 
debt.3  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to experiencing difficult personal 
circumstances in 2007 when three family members died in the space of 16 months. She 
also claimed her third husband was not helpful for her financial situation. She owes on 
her student loans from 1995, but is unsure what the outstanding amount is for those 
loans. She has not made any payments on the student loans in a number of years. Any 
federal tax refund destined for her is captured to pay toward her student loan debt. She 
claims she hired a credit monitoring service to clear up her credit report, but aside from 
providing a credit report, she did not document the efforts of the service.4  
 
 Applicant currently lives from paycheck to paycheck. She admitted just receiving 
her biweekly paycheck and after paying her bills only having $10 remaining to last for 
another two weeks until she is paid again. She has no 401K retirement account. Despite 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 5, 18-19; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-26, 28, 30, 32-34; GE 3-4; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-21, 36, 39, 43; AE A. Since her delinquent student loans were not alleged in the SOR, I 
will only use this information in assessing the applicability of any mitigating conditions and weighing the 
whole-person factors. 
 
 
3 
 
these tight financial circumstances, she recently purchased a new motorcycle with a 
monthly payment of $375. She does not have a monthly budget.5 
 
 Applicant denied that she intended to deceive the Government when she failed to 
list her repossessed vehicle on the trustworthiness application. I did not find Applicant’s 
denial credible. In her January 2015 trustworthiness interview with a defense 
investigator, she admitted knowing about the repossessed vehicle as early as March of 
2013. She further stated she thought she listed the repossession on her application.6 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 36-37, 44. 
 
6 Tr. at 26; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the trustworthiness concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
I have considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. I find the above disqualifying 
conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant failed to show efforts toward resolving her debt. This pattern shows a 
lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s personal circumstances, including family deaths and her husband’s 
action, were conditions beyond her control. She did not take responsible actions during 
the time after these events to deal with her debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
  
 Other than apparently hiring a credit monitoring service, there is no evidence of 
Applicant receiving financial counseling. With the exception of one paid debt, the 
remaining debts remain unaddressed. Applicant’s financial problems are not under 
control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve her debts is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) do not apply, with the exception of SOR ¶ 1.g. She failed to document any 
disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG & 15 expresses the trustworthiness concern for personal conduct: 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. 
I have considered all of them under AG & 16 and the following potentially applies:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant failed to list her repossessed car debt on her October 2014 
trustworthiness application. She was aware of the debt as early as March 2013. She 
went into great detail about the debt during her trustworthiness interview in January 
2015. I do not find Applicant’s denial of intentionally withholding this information 
credible. AG ¶ 16 applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and the following potentially apply:  
  
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Providing truthful information during a trustworthy determination is vital to insure 
the validity of the process. It is not a minor offense to deliberately provide false 
information during such a background investigation. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s difficult family circumstances. However, I also 
considered that all but one of her debts remain unpaid. She did not provide truthful 
information on her trustworthiness application. She has not established a meaningful 
 
7 
 
track record of debt management and her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
is suspect.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations and the personal 
conduct trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph:   2.a:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
