 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03455  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. DeAnglelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Arran S. Treadway, Esquire, Clarey & Green 
 
 
September 7, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 30, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 15, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H.1 The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 5, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) received the request on February 6, 2017. The undersigned administrative 
judge received the case assignment that same day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
on March 15, 2017, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 7, 2017. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received without objection. Applicant 
called three witnesses and testified on his behalf.  He also and submitted Exhibits A 
through I, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 
17, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in Paragraph 
1 of the SOR.  He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and unmarried. He has a Bachelor’s degree in 
Engineering. He has been working full time for a defense contractor since February 
2016.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.   
 
Applicant admitted to each of the allegations set for in the SOR concerning his 
illegal drug involvement and misuse of prescription drugs.  During a five year period 
while in college, Applicant experimented with a variety of illegal and prescription drugs 
not prescribed to him.  His last use of any illegal drug occurred in August 2015, six 
months before he started his current employment.   
 
Applicant attended College A, located in the small town where he grew up from 
November 2010 to sometime in 2013.  Illegal drug use was prevalent at the college, and 
almost considered a normal past time for many students.  During this period, Applicant 
associated with many illegal drug users.  In 2013, Applicant transferred to College B to 
finish his Bachelor’s degree in Engineering.  While at College B, Applicant became 
much more focused on his success at school, and was not as involved in illegal drug 
use as he had been at College A.  
 
From November 2010 to October 2015, Applicant no longer lived with his parents 
and found himself enjoying freedoms he is now not proud of.  Applicant used marijuana, 
cocaine, ecstasy, methamphetamine, speed, mushrooms and LSD.   He also used  
Adderal, painkillers, and sleeping pills, that were not prescribed to him.  He states that 
he purchased these drugs from random people at school.  He used these drugs on a 
sporatic and infrequent basis for recreational purposes, mainly at home, over the course 
of a five year period.  Despite using these illegal drugs and prescription drugs that were 
not prescribed to him, Applicant states that he did well in school.       
 
Applicant used, purchased, and sold, (meaning split the cost of the purchase of 
marijuana with a friend) marijuana, between September 2009 and August 2014.  In 
total, he believes that he used marijuana in excess of 100 times.  (Tr. p. 37.)  He used 
and purchased cocaine about 10 times from November 2010 to December 2014.  
Applicant explained that his misuse of prescription drugs, specifically Adderal, was to 
 
3 
 
 
help him concentrate on his school work.  He believes that he used Adderal a total of 50 
times.  In regard to his use of sleeping pills and pain pills, his use occurred about 10 
times from May 2010 to May 2013.  (Tr. p. 42.)  His use and purchase of stimulants, 
including ecstasy occurred three times, methamphetamine he used once, and speed he 
used once, from May 2010 to April 2011.  He also used and purchased mushrooms 
three times, and LSD one time during the period between February 2010 to March 
2011.   
   
 At College B, in 2013, Applicant’s use of illegal drugs decreased significantly.  He 
continued to use Adderal at times, and he also used marijuana on some occasions.  He 
completely stopped using the other illegal drugs.  He found his academics to be much 
more demanding.  The students he associated with were more mature and career 
driven.  Applicant was also maturing, and realizing that his illegal drug use had to come 
to a stop. Applicant worked hard and was rewarded for doing so by graduating with 
honors and he was on the Dean’s list.  Applicant was given the opportunity to co-op, 
which allowed him to work part time for a defense contractor while attending school full 
time while taking a rigorous schedule.   
  
 Applicant’s last use of any illegal drug was in August 2015.  He was hired by his 
current employer in February 2016.  Applicant states that he has not used any illegal 
drugs or misused any prescription drugs since working for his current employer.  
Applicant no longer associates with drug users, and if he is ever caught in a situation 
where he observes drug use, he states that he would remove himself from the 
environment.  (Tr. p. 51.)  Applicant currently associates with professionals who do not 
use illegal drugs.  As time has passed, Applicant has become more and more focused 
on his career goals.  Applicant submitted his performance appraisal for 2016 which is 
favorable.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 Three professional colleagues testified on Applicant’s behalf. They each attest to 
Applicant’s great character and professionalism.  Applicant is considered to be a hard 
worker, who produces high quality work.  His overall performance is described as very 
good.  He is considered to be valuable team member and an asset to the organization.  
Applicant is recommended for a security clearance.   
 
 Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s college professor, coworkers and 
friends indicate that Applicant is reliable, trustworthy, and responsible.  However, there 
is nothing in the letters that indicate that they are aware of Applicant’s past illegal drug 
use or misuse of prescription drugs.  They recommended Applicant for a security 
clearance.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying.  
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 As discussed above, Applicant used a variety of illegal drugs and misused a 
variety of prescription drugs that were not prescribed to him.  Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a), 
and (c), are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
  
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred mainly in college, and his last use occurred over 
two years ago.  Since he graduated from college, he has grown up and matured, he has 
joined the work force and has changed his environment and his friends.   Most 
importantly, he stopped using illegal drugs.   AG ¶ 26(a) and (b)1 and (b)2 are 
applicable here. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant no longer uses illegal 
drugs nor does he misuse prescription drugs.  During his younger years in college, he 
was surrounding by many drug users.  Applicant was also a young, immature, and 
inexperienced student when he was abusing drugs.  As time passed, he naturally 
matured.  When he transferred to another college he started associating with more 
academically focused and goal oriented people.  He gradually stopped using drugs, and 
has not used any drugs of any sort since he started working for his current employer.  
 
7 
 
 
He understands the responsibilities involved in having access to classified information 
and he understands that he must always abide by the law.  He has no intention of ever 
using any illegal drug again or misusing any prescription drug.  Applicant’s evolution to 
maturity shows current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  My comments 
regarding guideline H are incorporated here also.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement 
and substance abuse.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
