KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board cannot receive or consider any new evidence on appeal. Applicant has not
made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00316.a1
DATE: 09/22/2017
DATE: September 22, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00316
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On May 
27, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On June 29, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert Tuider denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement in which Applicant states that he has received another letter
from the U.S. Department of Education stating that his garnishment will be temporarily suspended.
Additionally, he states that he is actively working to implement a voluntary repayment plan and is
willing to forward the Board a copy of the repayment plan once it is established.
The Board cannot receive or consider any new evidence on appeal. See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Additionally, the Board does not review a case de novo. The Board’s authority to review a case is
limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
