 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00941 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated 
security concerns raised by an isolated arrest in 2013 and his failure to timely file his 
state and federal income tax returns in 2014. However, concerns raised by his 
unresolved delinquent debt remain. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 8, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.1 
DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke his security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and initially requested an administrative 
determination. In September 2016, Applicant requested a hearing.2 On March 17, 2017, 
I issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses, and the parties 
complied.3 At the hearing, convened on April 20, 2017, I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 28, 2017. Applicant timely submitted AE C 
through E, without objection.4  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has worked on the same federal contract since at 2010. During his 
tenure, he has worked for three different employers. He has held a security clearance 
since 2004. Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application in March 
2015, disclosing delinquent student loans and two other delinquent accounts. He also 
disclosed a 2013 deferred conviction for a misdemeanor theft. The ensuing investigation 
confirmed these details as well as other unresolved financial issues.5  
 
 Applicant’s deferred conviction arises from his failure to amend or withdraw a 
reimbursement claim he filed after an arrest. During a traffic stop where Applicant was 
the passenger, he was arrested on an outstanding bench warrant for failure to appear in 
an earlier traffic case. During the arrest, the police lost Applicant’s personal belongings, 
which included a cashier’s check for his rent. After his release from jail, Applicant 
returned to the place where he was arrested to look for his things. He found the 
cashier’s check, which constituted the majority of his reimbursement claim.  Applicant, 
believing that he was treated unfairly by the police, decided not to amend or withdraw 
his claim and accepted reimbursement for his items. Applicant was arrested in April 
2013 and charged with theft and making a false statement. He received probation 
before judgment and complied with the terms of his sentence. In October 2013, the 
matter was expunged from his record. Applicant regrets his behavior, which he admits 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) III.  
 
3 The prehearing scheduling order and the discovery letter are appended to the record as HE I and II, 
respectively.  
 
4 HE IV. 
 
5 Tr. 22-24, 33; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
showed poor judgment. He understands that his actions could have resulted in more 
severe penalties. He testified that he will not engage in criminal behavior in the future.6 
 
 Applicant’s current background investigation revealed financial problems more 
extensive than those he disclosed on his March 2015 security clearance application. 
Applicant failed to timely file his 2014 federal and state income tax returns. He did so to 
prevent the government from capturing his refund and applying it toward his defaulted 
student loans, which it had done since 2010. In 2015, Applicant rehabilitated his student 
loans and filed his outstanding tax returns. Applicant has since filed his income tax 
returns on time; however, he owes $1,000 in federal taxes for 2016. The investigation 
also revealed that Applicant also owes approximately $4,600 in delinquent accounts, 
including 22 unpaid parking tickets. Applicant believes that only eight of the tickets were 
issued to him. He claims that the other 13 tickets were issued to a car that he co-signed 
for a friend. In his August 2016 answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he was 
working with a credit repair service. He discontinued the service after realizing that the 
service only guaranteed accurate reporting on his credit report, but did not help him 
resolve his delinquent accounts. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant indicated that 
he would start paying his delinquent accounts in May 2017, but he did not articulate 
plan for doing so.7  
 
 Applicant earns approximately $41,000 annually. He is the primary source of 
income for his household, which includes his fiancée and her adult son. Although 
Applicant is willing to pay his delinquent accounts, he is wary of implementing a plan to 
do so because he believes his employment future is uncertain.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 39-32, 63-67; AE A-B. 
 
7 Tr. 24-29, 33-38, 46-62; GE 3-4; AE C.   
 
8 Tr. 19-22, 37, 82.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In 2013, Applicant received a deferred conviction for misdemeanor theft and 
making a false statement. While none of the specific personal conduct disqualifying 
conditions apply, his conduct falls under the general concern that Applicant exhibited 
questionable judgment, dishonesty, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, raising questions about his reliability trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.9 
 
 Applicant’s conduct is mitigated as an isolated act for which he expressed regret 
and remorse. Applicant’s involvement with the criminal justice system and the resulting 
deferred conviction will likely deter him from similar conduct in the future. Applicant 
properly disclosed the incident on his security clearance application; and he discussed it 
candidly throughout the adjudication process. As a result, it is an unlikely source of 
vulnerability for him and does not reflect negatively on his current security worthiness.10 
                                                          
9 AG ¶ 15. 
 
10 AG ¶ 17(e). 
 
5 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
However, Applicant’s finances remain a source of concern. Failure to meet one’s 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.11 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit reports establish the Government’s prima facie 
case that Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations and that he has 
an inability to do so.12 Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the concerns 
about his failure to timely file his 2014 income tax returns. He made arrangements with 
the appropriate tax authorities to file the outstanding returns.13 He also resolved the 
underlying cause of the issue by rehabilitating his defaulted student loans. Despite this 
favorable financial information, it is not enough to mitigate the remaining financial 
concerns. Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and were not caused by events 
beyond his control.  Although Applicant has expressed a desire to repay his creditors, 
the alleged accounts remain unresolved and Applicant did not present a plan for 
resolving them.  
  
After a review of the record and a consideration of the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2(d), I conclude that Applicant’s financial problems render him unsuitable for 
continued access to classified information at this time. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial 
stability necessary to reapply for national security eligibility in the future. Rather, it is 
recognition of the fact that financial issues have historically been a motivating factor 
behind acts of espionage. The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. While a favorable decision is not warranted at this time, he may 
present persuasive evidence of financial rehabilitation and reform in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.aa:    Against Applicant  
  
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ (18). 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 20(g).  
 
6 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
