 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00076 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCAs) in 2012 and 2016, 
requesting Department of Defense (DOD) security clearances. On May 2, 2017, the DOD 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). Applicant responded to 
the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1  
 
The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2017, scheduling the hearing for 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were revised on June 8, 2017, 
and are applicable to all decisions issued thereafter. 
 
2 
 
July 12, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 15 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE F through 
Q,2 which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
July 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old former employee of a defense contractor. He was last 
employed by a defense contractor from July 2016 to July 2017,3 for a government agency 
from 2015 to 2016, and for other contractors from 2011 to 2014. Since 2010, he has been 
unemployed on and off for approximately 17 months. During these times, he suffered 
financial hardships. He received a bachelor’s degree in computer science in 1997. He 
has been married since 1985, and has two adult children that live with him. Applicant has 
a long history of holding various security clearances. 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts totaling about $89,000, a revoked corporate 
credit card for misuse, and a 2010 collection lawsuit. In addition, the SOR alleges under 
guideline E that Applicant falsified his August 2012 and January 2016 SCAs by not 
reporting leaving a job under adverse conditions, financial delinquencies, civil suits, a tax 
lien, not paying traffic fines, and revocation of his employer’s credit card for misuse. He 
and his spouse testified at the hearing and he provided detailed answers to the SOR.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a debt for a time-share that was forfeited in lieu of foreclosure. 
Applicant purchased the time-share in 2002, but by 2003 or 2004, he could not afford the 
payments on the property, so agreed to relinquish it in lieu of foreclosure, and he does 
not owe anything further. No delinquency related to this property appears on Applicant’s 
latest credit bureau report (CBR)(GE 9). The account was closed in 2010 and resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.o, and 1.p allege student loans that are past due. Applicant testified 
that these loans were in a forbearance status in 2002 based on financial hardship, then 
converted to interest-only payments in 2006 when he lost his job, and finally reinstated to 
full repayment status in 2007. He could not pay the full amount. He made payments of 
$30 per month until 2014 on at least one of the loans per an agreement, but when they 
were consolidated with a new lender, he could not continue the full payments. He 
negotiated a repayment plan in 2017, with a first payment due under the plan on August 
21, 2017. The new plan shows a current balance of $57,557 with no amount past due. 
(AE N) 
                                                          
2 AE Q consists of post-hearing e-mails from Applicant noting his current employment status and requesting 
an expedited decision. Applicant submitted another document related to his mortgage on August 30, 2017, 
with a plea for a favorable decision. Department Counsel objected to the document as it was submitted 
after the record closed. All post-hearing e-mails and the mortgage document are admitted and attached as 
AE Q. 
 
3 Applicant was terminated from his position with a defense contractor in July 2017, after the hearing. He 
has been out of work since. He was offered another position, which was held open until August 5, 2017, 
pending a final security clearance decision. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c and 1.j involve Applicant’s mortgage. Applicant noted that a suit by the 
successor lender was dismissed in 2016, and he renegotiated a modified mortgage with 
the current mortgagee. He testified that his payments on his mortgage are current. His 
2017 CBR does not support a continuing mortgage delinquency. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k – 1.n, and 1.r allege consumer credit and medical 
debts that are past due or in a collection status. Applicant has not shown documentary 
evidence that these debts are duplicates, have been resolved or legitimately disputed, or 
that payments have been made on renegotiated accounts. Of note, the debt in SOR ¶ 1.r 
became delinquent in May 2008, and was charged-off in July 2012. (GE 5) Applicant 
testified that it was not resolved and that he would inquire into it after the hearing. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f involves a small amount owed to a cable television provider for a modem 
that Appellant purchased, but was billed as a rental. Applicant credibly disputed the debt 
with all three credit bureaus. This minor debt is resolved. SOR ¶ 1.h involves a loan for a 
vehicle that was voluntarily repossessed. Applicant testified that relinquishment of the 
vehicle satisfied the debt. His current CBR shows all loans by this creditor (credit union) 
have been paid and resolved. Likewise, Applicant’s 2012 CBR shows the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.q was resolved through payment of a negotiated amount in 2011. (GE 5) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.s alleged that Applicant was accused of misusing a corporate credit card 
in 2012, however the evidence does not sufficiently support the allegation. Corporate 
emails do not clearly show the alleged abuse of the credit card, and Applicant’s testimony 
indicates that he was never counseled on the use of the card, that he paid all balances 
when due, and he did not abuse the card at any time. SOR ¶ 1.t alleged a lawsuit by a 
creditor in 2010. Applicant provided evidence that he disputed the debt and the case was 
dismissed by the plaintiff in December 2011. 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant had no savings and $400 in a checking 
account. He claimed to have about $400 per month net remainder after payment of 
monthly expenses, but his personal accounts did not reflect it. Applicant was terminated 
from his position with a defense contractor in July 2017, after the hearing. He has been 
out of work since. He has a 401k retirement account valued at approximately $2,500. 
Applicant has not provided documentary evidence of financial counseling or professional 
assistance with resolving delinquent debts. In February 2017, he paid $18,000 in overdue 
federal taxes for tax years 2011 to 2013, resulting from an employer not withholding taxes. 
He claimed his federal and state tax obligations have been satisfied through withholding 
refunds. 
 
 Applicant was terminated from employment with a government contractor in 
December 2012 because of a dispute over his work schedule and use of personal leave. 
He did not report this termination on his 2016 SCA as leaving a job under mutual 
agreement after notice of poor performance. (SOR ¶ 2.a) He believed his supervisor 
improperly forced him to return overseas during a period when he had approved leave 
and had incurred personal expenses to return to the U.S. His supervisor gave him an 
ultimatum to return or be fired. Applicant declined to return as directed and requested 
reassignment in the U.S. No other position was offered, and his resignation was accepted.  
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.b alleges Applicant did not pay traffic tickets he received while he was 
working in a foreign country. He explained in testimony that if he did not present a 
passport when requested by police, a “ticket” would be filed with his employer. He never 
received a ticket or notice of a fine. He did not learn of the tickets or fines until after leaving 
employment and returning to the U.S., and did not know to whom he would pay. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d allege that Applicant failed to list his delinquent financial 
accounts in Section 26 of his 2016 and 2012 SCAs. Applicant testified that he did not 
include the information in his SCAs because of an oversight. He also claimed the 
delinquent debts were on his credit report and therefore, would have been known by the 
government, and he was “not thinking” when completing the SCA. He noted that he 
completed about six previous SCAs, has listed financial delinquencies in the past, and 
knew that he should have reported his debts but denied intentionally falsifying the SCAs. 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.e alleges that Applicant failed to list a 2013 state tax lien in his 2016 SCA. 
He testified that it was not listed because he was unaware a lien was filed, but knew there 
was a tax debt that his spouse was paying. His spouse also testified that they were not 
notified of the state tax lien. 
  
 SOR ¶ 2.f alleged Applicant failed to list his corporate credit card was revoked for 
misuse. He testified that he was unaware that it was revoked for misuse, that he was 
never notified of misuse, and that all cards for overseas employees were canceled at the 
same time.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.g and 2.h alleged that Applicant failed to list his civil court actions against 
him in his 2016 and 2012 SCAs. He testified that he believed he only needed to report 
active lawsuits, not those like his that were settled. In post-hearing submissions, Applicant 
provided a copy of various orders of dismissal, including an order in a case filed in 2015 
by a bank that was dismissed on May 3, 2016, well after Applicant completed his January 
2016 SCA. (AE J) 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
 
5 
 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems extending over many years, and incurred 
multiple delinquent debts that are unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Appellant attributed his financial problems to lost income during periods of 
unemployment and as a result of termination of an overseas assignment. Although these 
are conditions beyond his control, he failed to show efforts to adequately address his 
financial issues while he was employed and since receiving the SOR. His claimed net 
remainder after paying living expenses is not credible given the small balance in his 
checking account. Unfortunately, Applicant lost his job shortly after the hearing, and 
reportedly has not worked since. This situation undoubtedly has contributed to his dire 
financial status. I do not believe he has control over his finances.  
 
7 
 
 
 The majority of Appellant’s financial delinquencies have not been resolved and 
there is insufficient evidence to determine that they will be resolved within a reasonable 
period. For the unresolved debts, I am unable to find that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made good-faith efforts to pay his debts or negotiate good-faith 
solutions. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable 
but not conclusive. None of the other mitigating conditions apply, except as noted above. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  When falsification allegations are controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving the allegations. An omission, standing alone, does not prove 
falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.4 An applicant’s level 
of education and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate.5 
 
  Appellant did not report his delinquent financial accounts or civil court actions in 
his 2012 and 2016 SCAs. He denied intentionally falsifying the SCAs, and attributed the 
omissions as oversights, and the debts were listed on his credit report. He also noted that 
he was “not thinking.” He has a long history of completing SCAs, and claimed to have 
listed financial delinquencies in the past. He stated that he knew that he should have 
listed his debts on his SCAs. I find Applicant’s failure to report delinquent debts and civil 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
court actions on his 2012 and 2016 SCAs were intentional falsifications. AG ¶ 16 applies 
to SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.d, 2.g, and 2.h. 
 
  With regard to SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.e, 2.f, I am not convinced that Applicant 
intentionally falsified his SCA or intentionally refused to pay traffic ticket fines. He 
substantially refuted allegations regarding his knowledge of a state tax lien, traffic fines 
from a foreign country, and improper use of a corporate credit card. These constitute 
plausible explanations for his omissions on his SCA, and intentional falsification is not 
supported by the evidence. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable to SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.e, 2.f. 
These personal conduct security concerns are concluded for Appellant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 I find no mitigating condition applicable to Applicant’s failure to report his financial 
delinquencies and civil court actions in his 2012 and 2016 SCAs. Applicant was well 
aware of the reporting requirements since he has had a long history of completing similar 
applications. He was aware of his delinquent debts and past civil court actions but willfully 
failed to report them. His knowing lack of candor raises questions about his 
trustworthiness and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. No mitigating 
condition fully applies to alleviate the personal conduct concerns raised by the allegations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s testimony, his spouse’s testimony, and documents 
provided before and after the hearing. I understand that Applicant is facing financial 
hardships, however he has not shown past financial responsibility, nor has he gained 
control of his finances to show that he can pay his debts in the future. I am convinced that 
he knowingly failed to submit truthful answers on his SCAs as noted above. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-c, 1.f, 1.h, 1.j, 1.o-p; 1.s-t:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d-e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k-n; 1.q-r:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-b; 2.e-f:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c-d; 2.g-h:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
