 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00478 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debt. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for consideration. 
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on September 23, 2016. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on October 20, 2016, and provided a response. The items 
appended to the FORM and Applicant’s response are admitted as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant has worked for his employer, a federal contractor since 2011. In the 
past six years, he was worked on a number of contracts throughout the Middle East and 
Asia. Applicant was initially granted a security clearance in 2005 in connection with his 
military service. He served in the U.S. Army from June 2005 to December 2010, when 
he was medically discharged. On his most recent security clearance application, 
Applicant disclosed several delinquent accounts. The ensuing investigation revealed 
additional delinquent accounts, which formed the basis of the SOR allegations that 
Applicant was indebted to 11 creditors for approximately $66,000. Applicant, 32, admits 
that his financial problems were the result of his irresponsible spending habits and 
immaturity after he separated from the military. In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
indicated that the security clearance adjudication process provided a catalyst to reform 
his financial habits. To that end, Applicant began working to resolve his delinquent 
accounts.3  
 
 In August 2016, Applicant entered into a 45-month agreement with a debt-relief 
organization to negotiate and settle three of the alleged accounts, SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
($19,776), 1.e ($1,880), and 1.f ($657). The most recent documentation available as of 
November 2016, shows that Applicant paid over $1,000 to the service and the smallest 
of the enrolled accounts, SOR ¶ 1.f, has been resolved. Applicant also provided 
documentation showing that he has resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.c, and 1.g through 1.k, totaling 
approximately $2,600. He has also entered into a $400-per-month payment plan to 
resolve SOR ¶ 1.d ($26,739), which is the same account as SOR ¶ 1.b.4  
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 1-5. 
 
4 GE 2; AE A-I.  
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgement, or willingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An 
individual who is financially overextended is at a greater risk of having to engage in 
illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.5  
 
Applicant’s admissions and the credit report establish the Government’s prima 
facie case, that Applicant has a history of not meeting his financial obligations.6 
However, Applicant has presented sufficient information to mitigate the concerns raised 
by his delinquent debt. By November 2016, he had resolved 8 of the 11 accounts and 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
 
4 
 
entered into payment plans for the remaining three accounts. His efforts constitute a 
good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts and repay his creditors.7 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his history of financial 
mismanagement. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant acknowledges that irresponsible behavior in his twenties 
caused his financial problems. This acknowledgement and the steps Applicant has 
taken to rehabilitate his finances show an increased level of maturity. He now 
understands the importance of maintaining favorable financial history and the 
consequences of failing to do so. Accordingly, I am confident that Applicant is unlikely to 
engage irresponsible financial behavior in the future.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted.                                                
 
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 20(d). 
