1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  (Redacted)  )   ISCR Case No. 16-03067 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett C. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used opiates that were not prescribed for him from approximately 
December 2008 to December 2011. He received treatment from about September 2011 to 
November or December 2014 for opium addiction and severe depression. The drug 
involvement security concerns are mitigated by the passage of time with no intention of any 
future drug involvement. Personal conduct security concerns raised by his lack of candor 
about his drug abuse on his security clearance application are not mitigated. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On December 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the 
action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
 
2 
 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On January 4, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On April 10, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On April 19, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for May 24, 
2017. 
 
While this case was pending final adjudication, the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national 
security eligibility or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. On May 18, 2017, I provided 
Applicant with a copy of the updated Directive incorporating the new AG which supersede 
the adjudicative guidelines implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any 
adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. I advised him that I would be adjudicating his 
security clearance eligibility under the new AG,1 and that I would consider a request to 
leave the record open after his hearing for additional information if necessary in light of this 
change in the AG. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 24, 2017. Two Government exhibits 
(GEs 1-2) and seven Applicant exhibits (AE A-G) were admitted into evidence without 
objection. A letter forwarding discovery of the Government’s exhibits was marked as a 
hearing exhibit (HE 1) for the record but not entered into evidence. Applicant testified, as 
reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on June 2, 2017. Applicant did not request that the 
record be held open for post-hearing submissions. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant misused prescription opiates that 
were not prescribed for him on multiple occasions between December 2008 and January 
2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he received treatment from December 2011 to January 2014 for 
diagnosed opium addiction and severe depression (SOR ¶ 1.b). Under Guideline E, 
Applicant is alleged to have falsified his September 2015 security clearance application (SF 
86) by responding negatively to inquiries concerning whether he had intentionally misused 
any prescription drugs in the last seven years (SOR ¶ 2.a) and whether he had ever 
voluntarily sought counseling or treatment for use of a drug or controlled substance (SOR ¶ 
2.b). 
 
 When Applicant responded to the SOR, he admitted that he had used opioids 
(synthetically-derived painkillers) but never opium or opiates. He denied that he misused 
opioids during the time period alleged and explained that he had not misused any 
prescription painkillers since 2011 nor engaged in any illegal drug use since then. He 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
denied any intention of future involvement and attributed his drug use to a mental health 
issue that has since been resolved. Applicant admitted that he had been treated for 
depression and prescribed Suboxone. Applicant admitted that he had “misrepresented” his 
use of prescription painkillers on his security clearance application, but he denied any 
intention to deceive. He explained that he had not realized when he completed his SF 86 
that his abuse had occurred after 2008 and, not being sure of his last date of use, “[he] did 
not want to make a positive statement of drug use on a speculative date.” Applicant denied 
that he deliberately failed to disclose his treatment in that he disclosed information about 
his treatment provider on his form. He explained that he sought counseling “as a means of 
improving [his] mental health as [he] was suffering from depression and self-medicating 
with opioids.” He did not regard his counseling as a drug-treatment program. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old engineer with a bachelor’s degree awarded in January 
2009. He began working for his current employer, a defense contractor, initially as a 
subcontractor in November 2010. After 2.5 years, he was hired as an employee. He has 
not married. (GE 1; Tr. 30-31.) In January 2016, Applicant began taking graduate courses 
in computer science twice weekly in the evenings while working during the day for his 
employer. (GE 2; AEs F, G.) As of the spring semester 2017, he had a cumulative grade 
point average of 3.96 on a 4.00 scale. (AE G.) He expects to finish his master’s degree in 
the fall semester of 2018. (Tr. 30-31.) He has not previously held a DOD clearance. He 
requires a secret clearance to remain on his current program. (Tr. 32.) 
 
On September 16, 2015, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) incorporated within an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He responded “Yes” to the following 
inquiry: “In the last seven (7) years, have you consulted with a health care professional 
regarding an emotional or mental health condition or were you hospitalized for such a 
condition?” He provided the name of his psychologist and indicated that he had counseling 
or treatment from approximately September 2011 to approximately November 2014. 
Applicant responded “No” to all the inquiries concerning illegal use of drugs or drug activity, 
including the following: “In the last seven (7) years, have you illegally used any drugs or 
controlled substances?” and “In the last seven (7) years have you intentionally engaged in 
the misuse of prescription drugs, regardless of whether or not the drugs were prescribed 
for you or someone else?” He also responded “No” to whether he had ever voluntarily 
sought counseling or treatment as a result of his drug use. (GE 1.) 
 
During Applicant’s background investigation, information was developed that 
implicated Applicant in substance abuse. On January 19, 2016, Applicant was interviewed 
by an authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). After 
Applicant verified his negative response on his SF 86 to any illegal use of drugs or drug 
activity in the last seven years, he was informed that information had been developed that 
4 
 
he was a substance abuser from December 2011 to December 2014. After denying any 
illegal drug use a second time, Applicant elaborated that he began using opiates in 2009 
after surgery. After he exhausted his prescribed supply of painkillers, he purchased opiates 
from friends. He continued to use opiates without a prescription on a biweekly basis with 
friends in social settings until sometime in 2011. Feeling dependent on opiates and self-
medicating for depression, Applicant indicated that he sought counseling for his depression 
with the mental health practitioner listed on his SF 86, and the clinician prescribed 
Suboxone for him. Applicant asserted that he stopped using opiates in 2011 on a date that 
he could not recall. In response to why he did not list his misuse of opiates on his SF 86, 
Applicant stated that he thought his drug use was beyond the seven-year scope of the 
inquiry. He added that he would not have completed the SF 86 if he knew his substance 
abuse would have been raised as an issue. Instead, he would have waited to complete the 
SF 86 until his drug use was beyond the scope of the inquiry. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant responded to DOHA drug interrogatories on November 4, 2016. When 
asked to affirm whether he received drug abuse treatment, counseling, or supportive 
treatment in part for opiate addiction from about December 2011 to about December 2014, 
Applicant answered “Yes” but explained that he did not have access to his clinical records 
to validate that he completed his treatment. He added, “I do not use now and stopped 
taking my opiate addiction medication.” He stated that he sought treatment on his own 
when he recognized that he was addicted. After reviewing the OPM investigator’s report of 
his January 2016 interview, Applicant indicated that the report was inaccurate in that it 
could be inferred that he sought treatment for other than depression. He explained that 
Suboxone was prescribed for opiate addiction after his initial sessions. He added that he 
had no intention of obtaining a security clearance when he began this program and that he 
would have chosen to wait some time to show that his drug addiction was no longer an 
issue. Applicant made no other corrections to the report of his interview. (GE 2.) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified that he first used opiates when he had surgery 
right after college in 2008 or 2009 and that he used them sporadically and without a valid 
prescription. (Tr. 33.) He then indicated that he used opiates (Percocet, Vicodin, or 
oxycodone depending on availability) to address a “severe mental health crisis,” although 
he later indicated that there was also a “recreational component” to his drug abuse. He 
knew that his use of prescription opiates without a valid prescription was illegal. He testified 
that he used the opiates once or twice a week when he was with a friend from whom he 
purchased them illegally, spending “probably thousands.” (Tr.  27, 33-37, 54.) When asked 
whether he still associates with that friend, Applicant responded, “No. Okay, yeah, I’d 
prefer not to say if you don’t mind.” (Tr. 35.) Applicant attended high school with this 
person. He denied any in-person contact with him since “like, 2010, 2011.” Applicant’s 
friend obtained the drugs from a dealer who acquired the drugs from out-of-state 
prescription-medication clinics. Applicant was present on some occasions when his friend 
purchased opiates from the dealer, although not since 2010 or 2011. Applicant testified 
that he was still abusing opiates when he sought treatment for his depression in the fall of 
2011, after he had a breakdown during a biomechanical engineering class.2 (Tr. 36-39.) 
                                                 
2 The college’s degree audit for his graduate study indicates that he started his program in the spring semester 
of 2016. (AE F.) He earned his undergraduate degree in January 2009 after finishing his studies in December 
5 
 
Applicant maintained that he stopped using opiates a month or so after he began his 
counseling and informed his psychologist that he had an opiate problem, and she 
prescribed a low dose of the opiate antagonist Suboxone. Applicant denied any illegal use 
of drugs since then. (Tr. 40-41.) He stopped taking the Suboxone three years after the drug 
was first prescribed. (Tr. 55.) He stopped seeing the psychologist in 2014 in part because 
she continued to prescribe Suboxone for him when he thought he no longer needed it. (Tr. 
56.) Applicant’s family members are not aware that he had abused prescription drugs, 
although Applicant claims that he would be “okay with telling them now.” (Tr. 57.)  
 
About his failure to disclose his misuse of prescription opiates on his SF 86, 
Applicant testified on direct examination as follows: 
 
So when I filled out the e-QIP, I just didn’t do due diligence. That’s the 
honest truth, and I had used prescription drugs in the 2010 to—well, I had 
used them probably early 2011, but when I filled it out, I wasn’t thinking about 
time frame. It had been a number of years, maybe five years, and not having 
any records of my drug use, I erred on the side of caution and didn’t say I 
used them in the last seven years. Was that an intelligent decision, perhaps 
not, but that was the call I made at the time. (Tr. 26-27.) 
 
When confronted on cross-examination with his admission of having used opiates illegally 
to sometime in 2011, which would have been within seven years of his September 2015 SF 
86, Applicant reiterated that he was not sure when he had last used opiates and that he 
had to “dig back into [his] records to find exactly when [he] went to see [his psychologist] 
and determine, you know, [his] drug use timeline.” (Tr. 43-44.) When asked to explain why 
he was able to provide an estimated start date of September 2011 for his treatment but not 
able to provide beginning and end dates for his opiate use, Applicant had no answer other 
than he was not sure of the time, and there was no record of the time for his drug use. (Tr. 
45.) 
 
Character and Work References 
 
 Applicant’s annual performance evaluations for 2013 through 2015 reflect that he 
has met or exceeded established targets in all areas. He received an overall rating of “Fully 
Competent Performance” for 2013 (AE C) and 2014 (AE D), and the highest rating of 
“Exceptional Performance” for 2015. Applicant’s direct supervisor noted in 2015 that 
Applicant is “always willing and able to share his time and knowledge to the benefit of the 
team.” (AE E.) In a separate character reference letter (AE A), Applicant’s supervisor 
vouched for Applicant’s dedication and conscientious attitude toward his work. Applicant’s 
knowledge of logistics tools had proven invaluable to the team. She described Applicant as 
hardworking, ambitious, and committed to developing a quality product. (AE A.) 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
2008. When asked about his education during his January 2016 interview, Applicant did not indicate that he 
took any classes in 2011. He graduated from high school in June 2004, from college in late 2008, and began 
his graduate study in January 2016. 
6 
 
 A co-worker of Applicant’s for the past two years has developed a friendship with 
Applicant outside of work. This co-worker has had a security clearance for over 15 years 
and has not witnessed or heard of any behavior by Applicant blemishing his character or 
questioning his ability to safeguard information. Applicant has been instrumental in the 
success of their program and can be counted on to help every member of the team. (AE 
B.) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
7 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are articulated 
in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
Applicant began the illegal use of prescription opiates Percocet, Vicodin, or 
oxycodone shortly after he graduated from college in December 2008. He continued to use 
the drugs regularly, once or twice a week, until a month or so into his treatment for 
depression and opiate addiction. On his SF 86, he provided estimated dates of September 
2011 to November 2014 for his mental health treatment. Applicant affirmed in November 
2016 that he had drug treatment from about December 2011 to about December 2014. 
Mental health records that may have clarified the dates of Applicant’s drug use are not in 
evidence. Based on the record available, the evidence fails to establish that he misused 
opiates from December 2008 to January 2014 as alleged in the SOR. It may reasonably be 
concluded that Applicant abused opiates for three years, from approximately December 
2008 to December 2011. Applicant was prescribed Suboxone, an opiate antagonist, a 
month or so into his treatment with his psychologist. There is no evidence that he 
continued to abuse opiates while taking Suboxone. During the three years of his opiate 
abuse, Applicant paid a friend “thousands” for the opiates, knowing that they were acquired 
illegally from a drug dealer. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse 
(see above definition),” and AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession of a controlled substance, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia,” apply. 
 
The regularity of Applicant’s opiate abuse, his admission to the OPM investigator 
that he felt dependent on the opiates when he was self-medicating with opiates, and his 
treatment with Suboxone medication, suggest that he may have been addicted to opiates. 
Applicant indicated in November 2016 that he was prescribed Suboxone for opiate 
addiction. Yet, at his hearing he denied knowing whether he had been diagnosed with 
substance use disorder or whether that diagnosis had been established. There are no 
medical records in evidence, and the anecdotal references to a diagnosis of addiction fall 
short of establishing AG ¶ 25(d), “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health 
8 
 
professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of substance use disorder.” AG ¶ 25(e), “failure to successfully complete a drug 
treatment program prescribed by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional,” 
could apply in that Applicant apparently ceased his counseling with the psychologist in part 
because she continued to prescribe Suboxone that he felt he no longer needed, but it was 
also three years into his counseling, which he maintains was for mental health issues 
primarily and not drug treatment. 
 
 With no clear evidence implicating Applicant in the illegal use of opiates after 2011, 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies in that it happened “so long ago.” AG ¶ 26(a) provides: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
At the same time, his abuse of opiates up to twice a week for approximately three years, in 
knowing disregard of its illegality, raises considerable doubts about his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant is credited with voluntarily obtaining counseling when he felt he was 
dependent on opiates to self-medicate for his depression and with continuing in counseling 
for about three years. AG ¶ 26(b) provides for mitigation when an individual acknowledges 
his drug involvement and has taken steps to address it: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
 A comment in an OPM investigator’s report that Applicant was implicated in 
substance abuse from December 2011 to December 2014 falls considerably short of 
establishing that Applicant used opiates after 2011. Applicant denies any abuse of opiates 
after 2011. The dates provided by the investigator coincide with Applicant’s treatment, 
which included prescribed Suboxone. If the investigator had information contradicting 
Applicant’s report of no opiate abuse after 2011, it was not presented in evidence. Five 
plus years of no substance misuse is sufficient to establish a pattern of abstinence. 
Applicant testified that he has had no in-person contact with the friend involved in his 
opiate abuse since 2011, although when asked whether he was still associated with that 
friend, Applicant responded, “No. Okay, yeah, I’d prefer not to say if you don’t mind.” 
9 
 
However, his record of academic and work accomplishments since 2015 tends to 
substantiate that Applicant’s abuse of opiates is behind him. While I have some concerns 
about Applicant’s credibility because of his demonstrated lack of candor about his opiate 
involvement as outlined in Guideline E, infra, I cannot presume that he is continuing to 
abuse opiates without evidence of drug involvement or substance misuse. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct  
  
The concerns about personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15:  
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
Applicant repeatedly used opiates without a valid prescription from approximately 
December 2008 to December 2011, and he did not report that substance misuse on his 
September 2015 SF 86. He responded negatively on the form to all of the drug inquiries, 
including questions about whether he had intentionally misused any prescription drugs in 
the last seven years and whether he had voluntarily sought counseling or treatment as a 
result of his use of a drug or a controlled substance. It is simply not credible for him to 
claim that he lacked sufficient recall of the dates of his opiate abuse to not know that his 
drug use was within the seven-year scope of the relevant drug inquiries. He told an OPM 
investigator that he abused opiates from 2009 to sometime in 2011. Both the beginning 
and end dates for his illegal involvement with opiates were within seven years of his SF 86. 
 
Moreover, although Applicant reported his counseling on his SF 86 in response to 
the psychological and emotional health inquiries, he answered “No” to whether he had ever 
voluntarily sought counseling or treatment as a result of his use of a drug. Even assuming 
that he sought treatment primarily for mental health concerns, he knew he was self-
medicating his depression with opiates. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
stated, “I handled my addiction on my own with no need for external pressure. I recognized 
my addiction, sought treatment, and have not done opiates since.” In assessing Applicant’s 
credibility on this issue, I also cannot ignore Applicant’s initial lack of candor during his 
OPM interview about his opiate abuse. Disclosure of his opiate abuse came only after he 
was advised by the OPM investigator that information had surfaced implicating him in 
substance abuse and after he had verified for a second time his negative response to the 
SF 86 drug inquiry. Applicant’s motivation for concealing his illegal use of opiates and his 
treatment for his opiate abuse is seen in his admission that he would have chosen to wait 
to apply for a clearance until such time as his addiction no longer presented a security 
issue. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a) applies. It provides: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
10 
 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
  
None of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 fully apply. Concerning AG ¶ 17(a), 
“the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts,” Applicant twice verified his negative 
response to the drug-use inquiry before he admitted that he had used opiates illegally. 
Applicant’s SF 86 falsification was too recent, and, because it violates 18 U.S.C. § 1001 
too serious to implicate AG ¶ 17(c), which provides: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Perhaps more significantly from a trustworthiness standpoint going forward, 
Applicant’s ongoing failure to acknowledge the intentional nature of his SF 86 falsifications 
reflects a lack of reform. AG ¶ 17(d) is not reasonably established by his hearing testimony 
that he “erred on the side of caution” by denying any drug activity when he completed his 
SF 86. AG ¶ 17(d) provides: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
The personal conduct security concerns are not adequately mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).3 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(a), I have 
to consider Applicant’s mental health issues as a contributor to his opiate abuse. Even so, 
Applicant’s opiate abuse had a recreational component as well. Now that he has dealt with 
his mental health issues and taken Suboxone for approximately three years to address his 
                                                 
3 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
11 
 
illegal opiate use, he is not likely to resume his drug activity. He has established a good 
record at work and is held in high regard by his manager and a co-worker. It is unlikely that 
Applicant would be able to perform so well at work and in his graduate studies if he was 
abusing opiates with any regularity. 
 
However, Applicant raised considerable doubts about whether his representations 
can be fully trusted. He asks that I believe he did not give enough thought to the purpose or 
implications of his SF 86. Whether he was lying when he completed his SF 86 as the 
evidence overwhelmingly suggests, or he failed to give enough importance to the SF 86 to 
ensure the accuracy of his responses, he has yet to demonstrate the sound judgment that 
would be required of him should he be granted security clearance eligibility. It is well settled 
that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a 
strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. 
Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). The Government must be able to rely on 
those persons holding security clearance eligibility to fulfill their responsibilities consistent 
with laws, regulations, and policies, and without regard to their personal interests. For the 
reasons discussed, Applicant has raised enough doubt in that regard to where I am unable 
to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
