 
 1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-02086 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 19, 2016. 
On September 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 19, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 9, 2016. On November 14, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on November 11, 2016, and submitted a timely response, which was 
included in the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on September 7, 
2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the delinquent debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.e, attributing them to loss of employment. He denied falsifying his SCA, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Air Force from December 1977 to January 1998 and was honorably 
discharged. He received a security clearance in the Air Force. He married in April 1981. 
He and his spouse have an adult son, and his spouse has a daughter from a previous 
relationship. 
 
Applicant served as a flight engineer for a civilian airline from February 2004 to 
August 2006. He was unemployed from August to December 2006 after the airline went 
out of business. He worked as an electronic assembler for a non-government employer 
from December 2006 to May 2007 and as a flight engineer for a defense contractor from 
May 2007 to September 2012. He was unemployed from September 2012 to February 
2013. He worked as an aircraft mechanic from February to October 2013, and was laid 
off from October to December 2013. He worked as a refurbishing technician from 
December 2013 to March 2014, and was unemployed from March to July 2014. He 
worked as a machine operator from July 2014 to April 2015, when he was fired after being 
accused of working a cross-word puzzle while operating a machine. He was unemployed 
from April to June 2015, when he began his current job. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he answered “No” to all the questions about 
financial delinquencies. In his answer to the SOR, he denied falsifying his SCA and 
explained that he answered “No,” because a “Yes” answer activated a drop-down menu 
asking for detailed information that he did not have, and he could not continue completing 
the SCA until he supplied the additional information. 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he stated that he was paying his delinquent 
debts through payment agreements. He did not submit any documentary evidence of 
payments or payment agreements. 
 
  
 
 3 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative 
judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
 4 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security clearance.” ISCR Case 
No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling about $15,368. They consist of a 
deficiency after an automobile repossession (SOR ¶ 1.a) and four delinquent consumer-
credit accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e). The debts are reflected in a credit report from February 
2016 (FORM Item 3). 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the February 2016 credit report, establish 
the three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 5 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, ongoing, and were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. Except for his unemployment from April to June 2015, which was due to 
being fired for cause, his periods of unemployment and underemployment were 
conditions beyond his control, but he has not presented documentary evidence of 
responsible conduct. There is no evidence that he has received financial counseling. He 
claimed that he was paying his debts through payment agreements, but he submitted no 
documentary evidence of payments, payment agreements, or other efforts to resolve his 
debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire 
. . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s level of education and experience are relevant 
 
 6 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for many years. Although he may not have 
been familiar with the electronic format when he submitted his most recent SCA, he knew 
that delinquent debts were a security concern, and he has not convincingly explained why 
he did not seek assistance with his application, use the “remarks” section at the end of 
the SCA to indicate that he had financial problems, or attempt to correct his SCA after he 
submitted it. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. There is no evidence that Applicant tried to correct 
his omission of the derogatory financial information from his SCA. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(b) is not established. Falsification of an SCA is not “minor,” because it 
undermines the integrity of the security clearance process. Applicant’s falsification is 
arguably infrequent, because there is no evidence of other falsifications. However, it did 
not happen under unique circumstances, and it casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-person concept, an 
administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by 
considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. An 
administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(c).2  
  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 7 
I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(c). I have considered Applicant’s 
military service and his periods of unemployment and underemployment. He has held a 
security clearance for many years, apparently without incident. Because Applicant 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). Based on the evidence in the record, including the 
evidence submitted by Applicant, I conclude that he has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his financial problems and his falsification of his SCA. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
