 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00594 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 13, 2015. On 
August 20, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline B and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 7, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
17, 2016. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2017. On June 1, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 22, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, I admitted Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 into evidence 
without objection. I appended to the record a letter the Government sent to Applicant as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s exhibit list as HE II. Applicant testified and 
did not submit any exhibits. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open until July 6, 
2017. Applicant timely provided additional documents, which I admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. I appended post-hearing emails as HE III. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 5, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied 
the June 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the September 2006 AG because 
they were in effect on the date the SOR was issued. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 At the hearing, I granted Department Counsel’s motion, without objection, to 
amend the SOR to withdraw the sole Guideline C allegation, paragraph 1.a of the 
SOR.3  
 
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant is 53 years old and has been married for 26 years. He and his wife 
have three children, ages 24, 19, and 11. Applicant received his associate’s degree in 
1984 from a technical college in Israel, bachelor’s degree in 1994 from a university in 
Israel, and master’s degree in 2000 from a U.K.-affiliated university based in Israel. 
Since then, Applicant has worked as an engineer in the telecommunications field.5  
 
In approximately 1988, Applicant became employed by a private Israeli high-tech 
company (Company A) in its Israel office and then transitioned to its U.S. branch office 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Tr. at 9. 
 
4 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer and his SCA (GE 1).  
 
5 See also Tr. at 6-8, 29-31. 
 
 
3 
 
in 2000, where he remained until he was laid off in 2013. In 2002, he began working in 
support of the U.S. defense industry. 6   
 
In 2014, Applicant began his own consulting company. His jobs included 
representing the interests of two different private Israeli telecommunications companies 
in the sale of their products to U.S. companies. Company B was an Israeli company and 
Company C was a company that was registered in the U.S. but developed its product in 
Israel. He received a commission-based salary from Company B in an amount not 
specified in the record, and a monthly salary of $1,500 from Company C. He worked 
with Company C for approximately two years beginning in 2014, and with Company B 
for a period not specified in the record in 2015. He is no longer affiliated with either 
entity and has no present ties with any other Israeli companies.7  
 
In 2015, Applicant contracted as a consultant through his company with the 
defense contractor sponsoring his first application for a security clearance. In 2016, he 
began working full time for his current employer as a salaried employed. Since then, his 
consulting company has remained dormant, as he is not able to accept any work from 
his sponsor until he receives his security clearance, and has not taken on any other 
clients.8  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2000, as a citizen of Israel. In 2008, 
he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, retaining dual citizenship. His wife and three 
children have similar dual citizenship. His two older children were born in Israel, and his 
youngest in the United States. The SOR alleges the dual citizenship of his wife (SOR ¶ 
2.b), but not his children. Applicant and his wife are both willing to renounce their Israeli 
citizenship if it is required for him to maintain a security clearance.9 
 
Applicant has one sibling. She is a citizen and resident of Israel (SOR ¶ 2.d). 
Applicant’s father is also a citizen and resident of Israel, as are his wife’s parents (SOR 
¶¶ 2.c, 2.e, and 2.f). His father, age 86, retired over 20 years ago from the textile 
industry. Applicant’s sister, age 56, is employed by a private health company. Her 
husband is retired from the retail industry. His wife’s parents are both retired. His 
mother-in-law, age 72, was an elementary school teacher, and his father-in-law, age 71, 
was a programmer in the banking industry. None of these family members had careers 
affiliated with the Israeli military or government except for his father-in-law, who was 
associated with certain banks that may have been governmental entities. His mother-in-
law receives a government-sponsored pension in an amount not specified in the record. 
Applicant did not know whether his father-in-law’s pension is similarly sponsored. His 
                                                          
6 See also Tr. at 6-8, 22-25, 29-32, 44-46, and 51-52. During his tenure with Company A, the name of the 
company changed at times to reflect various divisions and acquisitions. Any reference to Company A 
includes those various names. 
 
7 See also Tr. at 6-8, 22-25, 29-32, and 44-46. 
 
8 See also Tr. at 6-8, 22-25, 29-32, and 44-46.  
 
9 See also Tr. at 26. 
 
 
4 
 
father receives social security and a holocaust-survivor pension from the Israeli 
government in amounts not specified in the record, which serve as his primary means of 
support. Applicant is in contact with his father daily by phone, and with his sister and his 
wife’s parents weekly by phone or electronic means. He sees them in person during his 
visits to Israel.10  
 
Applicant maintains “casual” contact with three friends who are citizens and 
residents of Israel (SOR ¶ 2.g). All three friends are his former Company A coworkers. 
Friend 1 is now employed by another private telecommunications company. Friends 2 
and 3 remain employed by Company A. Historically, Applicant was in contact, by phone 
or electronic means, weekly with Friend 1, monthly with Friend 2, and quarterly with 
Friend 3. In the last two years, that contact has not been “very often.” He sees them in 
person during his visits to Israel.11 
 
Applicant visits Israel at least once each year, sometimes more. He intends to 
continue those visits, especially since his father is aging. When he was consulting, he 
sometimes travelled there for work. Otherwise, his visits are to spend time with family 
and friends. During the last two years, he has stayed with his sister during his visits. On 
prior occasions, he has stayed in a hotel. In 2016, he brought his two daughters with 
him. He plans to bring his youngest daughter with him in 2017.12 
 
Applicant and his wife each maintain separate retirement accounts in Israel, with 
a combined worth of approximately $300,000 (SOR ¶ 2.h). Applicant and his sister 
share equally the ownership of the apartment where their father resides. His share is 
approximately $175,000 (SOR ¶ 2.a). Applicant maintains a bank account with his sister 
to pay for his father’s day-to-day expenses (SOR ¶ 2.i). The account carries a balance 
of no more than approximately $4,000 at any given time. Applicant and his wife either 
sold or transferred to the United States any asset they previously owned in Israel before 
immigrating to the United States.13  
 
Applicant and his wife maintain assets in the United States, including their 
primary residence with equity valued at approximately $350,000, a rental property with 
equity valued at approximately $150,000, two undeveloped plots of land valued at an 
amount not specified in the record, and separate retirement accounts with a combined 
worth of approximately $420,000.14 
                                                          
10 See also Tr. at 26-27, 33-37, and 54. I considered that Applicant’s brother-in-law completed his 
mandatory military service, and may have served “a little bit longer.” While Applicant was not certain, he 
estimated his father’s service to have been less than five years.  
 
11 See also Tr. at 27, 37-39. 
 
12 See also Tr. at 53-54. 
 
13 See also Tr. at 25-28, 39-41. 
 
14 Tr. at 42-45, 49-50; AE A through E. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s two eldest children were ages seven and three when they immigrated 
to the United States. Since then, they have been educated in U.S. schools. His eldest 
child is currently a graduate student, his second is a college student, and the third is in 
middle school. Applicant and his family have built a life here in the United States and 
have no plans to live elsewhere.15 
 
Applicant served in the Israeli Air Force from 1983 through 1987, of which three 
years were mandatory. Applicant has not voted in an Israel election since he moved to 
the United States.16 Applicant served in a two-day jury trial in May 2017.17 A friend and 
former colleague praised Applicant’s character and work performance. He described 
Applicant’s work on an important defense project as making a “huge difference in the 
war effort.”18 
 
Administrative Notice (Israel) 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the U.S. Government’s pronouncements 
concerning Israel, as outlined in GE 2 and the documents appended thereto, including 
the following:  
 
 Although the United States has provided regular military support to Israel, there 
is a significant documented history of classified information and controlled 
technologies being illegally imported by private Israeli entities. Illegal technology 
transfers, even to private Israeli entities, are a significant concern because 
foreign government entities – including intelligence organizations and security 
services – have learned to capitalize on private-sector technology acquisitions. 
 
 In the past 30 years, there have been at least three cases in which U.S. 
Government employees were convicted of disclosing classified information to 
Israel or of conspiracy to act as an Israeli agent. Reports indicate that concerns 
regarding possible Israeli espionage persist among U.S. officials. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State warns all persons seeking to enter or depart Israel, 
the West Bank, or Gaza are subject to security screening, including prolonged 
questioning and physical searches, and may be denied entry or exit. Israeli 
security officials have also on occasion requested access to travelers’ personal 
e-mail accounts or other social media accounts as a condition of entry. In such 
circumstances, travelers should have no expectation of privacy for any data 
stored on such devices or in their accounts. 
 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 22-29, and 59-61. 
 
16 See also Tr. at 22, 24, 29, and 53-54. 
 
17 Tr. at 56. 
 
18 AE F. 
 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”20 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”21 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.23 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”24 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
                                                          
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
20 Egan at 527. 
 
21 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
22 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
23 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
24 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
7 
 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.25 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.26 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.27 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”28 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”29 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
The security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) is set out in AG ¶ 6, 
as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially 
relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
                                                          
25 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
26 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
27 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
28 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
29 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s ties to his father, sister, and in-laws who are citizens and residents of 
Israel establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b), and his indirect ties to his in-laws through his wife 
establish AG ¶ 7(e). While casual in nature, Applicant’s contact with close friends who 
work in the telecommunications industry establishes AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(f) is 
not established as to Applicant’s interest the apartment where his father’s resides, his 
retirement account, and the bank account used for his father’s benefit given that the 
nature and value of those assets is not substantial as compared to the nature and value 
of his U.S. assets. A “heightened risk” is associated with Israel given its infringements 
on privacy rights, history of illegally imported classified information and controlled 
technologies, and the concerns regarding possible Israeli espionage against the United 
States. Applicant’s wife’s dual citizenship does not establish any disqualifying condition 
under Guideline B.  
 
The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are established: 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
Applicant chose to immigrate to the United States over 17 years ago with his wife 
and two children. His third child was born in the United States. Applicant has 
accumulated significant U.S. assets, been gainfully employed in the U.S. for over 17 
years, and began working with the defense industry 15 years ago. Neither Applicant nor 
 
9 
 
any of his Israel-based family or friends have any security-significant connection to the 
Israeli military or government. His immediate family are all citizens and residents of the 
United States. While Applicant has close ties to family and friends who are citizens and 
residents of Israel, his stronger ties are in the United States. Therefore, I conclude that 
Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
In the event that Applicant’s interest the apartment where his father’s resides, his 
retirement account, and the bank account used for his father’s benefit are deemed 
sufficient to establish AG ¶ 7(f), I find the nature and value of those assets is such that 
they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant was candid, sincere, 
and credible at the hearing. He is highly regarded for his work performance and 
character. He has made important contributions to the U.S. war effort through his work 
in support of the defense industry. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole 
person and the “heightened risk” associated with Israel, I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the concerns raised by his ties to citizens and residents of Israel, and by his 
assets in Israel. Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
  
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.i: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
 
