 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 16-00727 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised by Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On June 22, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On August 20, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, which became 
effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a public 
trust position for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
On September 15, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a decision 
without a hearing. (Item 1) On September 28, 2016, Department Counsel completed the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 14, 2016, Applicant received the FORM. 
She did not submit any information within the 30-days after receiving the FORM. On 
August 10, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case file consists of six exhibits, all 
of which are admitted. (Items 1-6)  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to 
all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified 
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the 
September 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 
2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s public trust position eligibility under the 
new AGs.1 My decision would have been the same under the prior AGs. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 The SOR alleged 13 debts under financial considerations. Applicant admitted SOR 
¶ 1.a, and denied the others. She provided explanations in response to all 13 allegations. 
Her admission is accepted as a finding of fact. Additional findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old claims processor employed by a defense contractor 
since 1998. She seeks a public trust position in conjunction with her current employment. 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1984, and was awarded a cosmetology degree 
in 1986. She was married from 1991 to 1996, and that marriage ended by divorce. 
Applicant has no dependents.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR consists of debts that total approximately $25,622.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.m) 
These allegations are established through Applicant’s admissions in part; her March 12, 
2015 SF-86; her April 11, 2015 and January 25, 2016 credit reports; and her July 21, 
2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM PSI). (Items 2 - 
6) 
 
 As noted, Applicant admitted to SOR ¶ 1.a, $1,536 student loan collection account 
she co-signed for her nephew. She provided proof of a payment and deferment of this 
loan. (Item 2). With regard to the remaining 12 SOR debts, she stated, “[these] debt[s] 
[are] not currently showing on my credit reports… .” (Item 2) Applicant provided copies of 
credit reports that she referenced with her SOR answer. However, during her OPM PSI, 
                                            
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf. 
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant discussed the specifics behind most of the debts alleged that she now denies. 
(Item 6) In her SOR answer, Applicant did not provide supporting documentation 
evidencing payment of the remaining 12 delinquent debts or successful resolution of 
them, nor does she provide sufficient explanation or documentation of the current status 
of each debt.  
 
 Applicant has been gainfully employed since 1998. There is no information to 
support that her financial difficulties were a result of circumstances beyond her control or 
have been otherwise addressed warranting mitigation. The record also does not contain 
character evidence, such as reference letters, performance evaluation, or other evidence 
that would support a whole-person analysis. 
  
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines assignment to sensitive 
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning 
the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.  
  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists seven potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
5 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Application of AG ¶ 20(d) is applicable to the debt contained in SOR ¶ 1.a. With 
regard to the remaining 12 SOR debts, no mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant 
asserts that she does not owe the remaining 12 debts because they have been deleted 
from her credit report. Security requirements must include consideration of an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and an assessment of an applicant’s overall sense of her or her legal 
obligations.  
 
It is well settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under ¶ E3.1.14. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7. 
2010). Conversely, the Board has noted that the fact that a debt no longer 
appears on a credit report does not establish any meaningful, independent 
evidence as to the disposition of the debt. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2015). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04802 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2016) at 3. 
 
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors 
under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-
person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority 
 
6 
                                         
 
of her adult life, and she is presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, 
without other information suggesting her financial problems are being addressed, doubts 
remain about her suitability for a public trust position. Protection of the national interest is 
the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be resolved 
against the Applicant. 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, she failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances, 
articulate her position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. She failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding her past efforts to 
address her delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying solely 
on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to fully establish mitigation, financial 
considerations security concerns remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
