 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-00113 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concern. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a single security concern under Guideline E 
(personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 26, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 16, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for July 7, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
  
The Government’s exhibit list and discovery letter were appended to the record 
as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
At Applicant’s request and with no objection from the Government, I left the 
record open until July 21, 2017, for the parties to submit additional documentation. 
Applicant timely provided documentation, which I marked as AE C and admitted in 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 14, 2017. 
I appended to the record as Appellate Exhibit (AE) 1 documents of which I took sua 
sponte administrative notice, as discussed below. 
     
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegation. He is 58 years old. He has worked for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, since 2007. He obtained a high-school diploma 
in 1977, and he served honorably in the U.S. Army Reserve from 1984 to 1988. He 
worked for two previous defense contractors from 2003 until he obtained his current job. 
He was previously married from 1985 to 2003, from which he has three adult children. 
He married his current wife in November 2015, and they have two children, ages five 
and two, who are native-born U.S. citizens. He has held a DOD security clearance since 
2008.2  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s wife is an illegal resident of the United States 
and Applicant financially supports her. The SOR allegation is established by Applicant’s 
admission.3  
 
 Applicant’s wife, age 41, is a citizen of Ghana and held a Ghanaian passport as 
of January 2015. She immigrated to the United States in 2007 on a work visa. When 
Applicant met her through a mutual friend in 2009, both she and Applicant were 
divorced. They began cohabitating in April 2010, had their first child in June 2012, had 
their second child in September 2014, and married in November 2015.4  
 
 Applicant has financially supported his wife since they began cohabitating, 
though she has held employment in health services on occasion. As of Applicant’s 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 18-50; GEs 1-2; AEs A-C. Applicant also indicated that he held a 
Department of State security clearance as of June 2016. GE 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s SOR response; Tr. at 18-50; GEs 1-2; AEs A-C. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-50; GEs 1-2. 
 
 
3 
 
September 2015 interview with an Office of Personnel Management investigator, his 
wife was unemployed. During that interview, Applicant stated that he believed his wife’s 
work visa was valid when they began cohabitating, and he did not know the date or 
reason her visa expired. He further stated that he was working with an immigration 
attorney to get his wife permanent residency in the United States, her paperwork was 
pending, and he planned to file for a marriage visa after they married.5 
 
 Applicant stated at hearing that when he met his wife, he believed her work visa 
had expired but her immigration status was pending. He understood from her that her 
immigration paperwork had to be re-evaluated due to her extenuating circumstances, as 
her ex-husband initiated the immigration process for her prior to his permanent move 
back to Ghana between 2007 and 2008. He also understood from her that she had 
been working with an immigration attorney, though her efforts were constrained by time 
and money.6 
 
 Due to money constraints, Applicant was unable until October 2016 to retain the 
same immigration attorney that his wife had worked with previously. The attorney filed 
an I-130 Petition for Alien Relative on behalf of Applicant’s wife. In November 2016, 
they received a Notice of Action from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services (U.S. CIS), indicating the petition was in process. 
In January 2017, they received an Approval Notice from DHS U.S. CIS indicating the 
petition was approved and sent to the Department of State (DOS) National Visa Center 
for further processing. At hearing, Applicant stated that they had not yet heard from the 
DOS regarding the status of their processing of his wife’s approved petition. As of July 
2017, the immigration attorney indicated that he was in the process of filing an I-485 
Application to Register Permanent Residence or Adjust Status on behalf of Applicant’s 
wife. The attorney further stated that he expected the case to go to immigration court, 
and that the immigration case of Applicant’s wife had been in administrative 
proceedings since 2005.7 
  
 Applicant stated that he reported his cohabitation with his wife and her 
immigration status to his employer, and abided by his employer’s guidelines for having a 
relationship with a foreign national. He listed his wife as a cohabitant and disclosed her 
foreign citizenship on his January 2015 security clearance application. As previously 
noted, he discussed his wife’s immigration status during his September 2015 interview. 
He further discussed his wife’s immigration status in his June 2016 response to the 
Government’s interrogatories. Applicant stated that his work performance has been 
exemplary.8  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 18-50; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 18-50. 
 
7 GE 2; AEs A, B, C.  
 
8 Tr. at 18-50. 
 
4 
 
 I take administrative notice of section 1324 of Title 8 of the United States Code, a 
federal statute that makes it a felony crime to harbor an illegal alien. The statute reads, 
in pertinent part: 
 
 §1324. Bringing in and harboring certain aliens 
 
 (1) (A) Any person who -- 
 
(iii) knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that an alien has come to, 
entered, or remains in the United States in violation of law, conceals, 
harbors, or shields from detection, or attempts to conceal, harbor, or 
shield from detection, such alien in any place, including any building or 
any means of transportation; 
 
 shall be punished as provided in subparagraph (B). 
 
(B) A person who violates subparagraph (A) shall, for each alien in respect to 
whom such a violation occurs -- 
 
(ii) in the case of a violation of subparagraph (A) (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v)(ll), be 
fined under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 5 
years, or both. 
 
 I also take administrative notice that the term “harbor,” as used in section 1324 of 
Title 8 of the U.S. Code and as construed by the United States Court of Appeals, 9th 
Circuit, means “afford shelter to.”9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
9 8 U.S.C. §1324 (2017); United States v. Acosta DeEvans, 531 F.2d 428 (9th Cir. 1976). As a general 
rule, the parties are entitled to know what information an Administrative Judge is relying on in making a 
decision. There are some narrow exceptions to this general rule: official or administrative notice, and 
matters known to an agency through its cumulative expertise. ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Mar. 21, 2000). 
 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
Applicant knew when he met his wife in 2009 that her work visa, granted to her in 
2007, had expired. They began cohabitating in April 2010, upon which time Applicant 
began financially supporting her, and they married in 2015. Since 2009, however, 
Applicant believed that his wife’s immigration status was pending. He understood from 
her that her immigration paperwork had to be re-evaluated due to her extenuating 
circumstances, as her ex-husband initiated the immigration process for her prior to his 
 
6 
 
permanent move back to Ghana between 2007 and 2008. He also understood from her 
that she had been working with an immigration attorney, though her efforts were 
constrained by time and money.  The record supports a conclusion that Applicant’s 
actions do not violate section 1324 of Title 8 of the United States Code. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 Applicant knew when he met his wife in 2009 that her work visa, granted to her 
in 2007, had expired. While he believed her immigration status was pending, he knew 
that she did not have the legal documentation to reside legally in the United States. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 16(e) and 16(g) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 When Applicant met his wife in 2009, he understood from her that she had been 
working with an immigration attorney, her immigration status was pending, and her 
immigration paperwork had to be re-evaluated. Applicant stated that he reported his 
cohabitation with his wife and her immigration status to his employer, and abided by his 
employer’s guidelines for having a relationship with a foreign national. He listed his wife 
as a cohabitant and disclosed her foreign citizenship on his January 2015 security 
clearance application. He discussed his wife’s immigration status during his September 
2015 interview. He further discussed his wife’s immigration status in his June 2016 
response to the Government’s interrogatories.  
 
 After saving enough money, Applicant retained the same immigration attorney in 
October 2016 that his wife had worked with previously. As of July 2016, the immigration 
attorney confirmed that the immigration case of Applicant’s wife had been in 
 
7 
 
administrative proceedings since 2005 and is still pending. Applicant provided 
documentation to show that they received an Approval Notice from DHS U.S. CIS in 
January 2017, indicating his wife’s petition was approved and sent to the DOS National 
Visa Center for further processing. At hearing, Applicant stated that they had not yet 
heard from the DOS regarding the status of their processing of his wife’s approved 
petition. AG ¶¶ 17(e) and (g) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
