 
1 
  
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-01983 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has two unpaid 
judgments totaling approximately $7,500 and three other delinquent accounts totaling 
approximately $10,000. Additionally, he also failed to disclose his delinquent obligations 
when he completed his October 2015 security questionnaire. He has failed to mitigate the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 21, 
2016, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
September 1, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On September 27, 2016, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM). The FORM contained five attachments (Items). On October 5, 2016, 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to 
the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. He had 30 days from his receipt of the FORM to 
submit any additional information in response to the FORM. The response was due on 
November 4, 2016. No response or other additional information was received from 
Applicant. On August 8, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the five delinquent obligations and 
stated he had paid off most of the debt, but he failed to provide documentation 
corroborating payment of his debts. He also admitted not disclosing he had “lost [his] 
house” because he worried that revealing it would negatively impact his ability to get a 
job. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old elevator technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2015, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. Since 
April 1999, he has been a self-employed elevator mechanic. (Item 4) Between January 
1993 and June 1997, he served on active duty for training and as a reservist in the U.S. 
Marine Corps. (Item 4) In late 1994, he broke his foot, which failed to heal properly. The 
injury resulted in him being discharged from the reserves due to unsatisfactory drill 
performance. (Item 4) He also stated he had been in Afghanistan, but did not indicate 
when his occurred, if he was a civilian or in the military while there, or how it impacted on 
his finances. In November 2005, he was divorced ending a six-year marriage. (Item 3)  
 
 In January 1999, Applicant was sentenced to six months in jail for violation of a 
restraining order, intimidation, and for violation of his eight-year probation period he had 
received from prior convictions. (Item 4) He received four days off for good behavior and 
served the remainder of the six-month sentence. He was unable to pay his debts while 
incarcerated. 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
 
3 
When Applicant completed his October 2015 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he was asked in Section 26 – Financial Record, 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts, if, during the past seven years, he had a 
judgment entered against him; had any repossessions or foreclosures; had defaulted on 
any loans; had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or 
credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; been more 
than 120 days delinquent on any debt; or was currently more than 120 days delinquent 
on any debt. He answered “no” to these inquires. The delinquent obligations are listed in 
the November 2015 credit report. (Item 5) 
In Applicant’s December 2015 personal subject interview (PSI), he denied he had 
any judgments entered against him during the previous seven years. (Item 4) When 
confronted about the $5,924 credit card judgment (SOR 1.a), he acknowledged the 
account was for a credit card he used for work. The account became delinquent while he 
was incarcerated. (Item 4) As of the time of his interview, he had not made efforts to pay 
the debt.  
When confronted about the $1,603 judgment (SOR 1.b), Applicant had no 
knowledge about the judgment. During his interview, he said he would look into the 
obligation and, if he owed the judgment, would pay it within the next year. (Item 4)  
Applicant purchased a home, which required a $2,200 monthly payment on a 
$280,000 mortgage. (Item 4) His mortgage went into collection due to his incarceration. 
The home went for foreclosure. As of December 2016, he did not know how much is owed 
on this obligation, but intended to look into it and pay what he owes on the debt. (Item 4) 
Any debt that may exist following the foreclosure is not listed as an SOR debt of concern. 
He was unsure why he failed to list he foreclosure on his e-QIP.  
In 2012, Applicant purchased a truck for $15,000. In 2014, the truck was 
involuntarily repossessed. He owed $6,374 (SOR 1.d) at the time of the repossession. 
He intended to establish a repayment plan and pay off the debt within one year of his 
December 2015 interview. (Item 4) He did not list his debt on his e-QIP because he was 
unsure of the status of the debt.  
During Applicant’s interview, he was questioned about the $3,300 medical 
collection debt (SOR 1.e) and a $167 (SOR 1.c) telecommunication collection debt. He 
was unaware of these two debts, said he would look into them, and pay them if he needs 
to pay them. As of the interview, he had no credit counseling. 
Applicant provided no documentation corroborating his assertions in his SOR 
response that he had “paid most of that debt off,” nor corroboration showing any payment 
of his delinquent obligations. He was informed of his need to document the assertions he 
made in his SOR response. The FORM stated: 
Absent documentary evidence submitted in response to this FORM that 
Applicant has acted responsibly and in good-faith to satisfy his delinquent 
debts, established a sustained track record of financial responsibility, and 
 
4 
sufficiently explained his failure to report these delinquencies, the 
unmitigated SOR allegations establish a basis for disqualification under 
Directive’s Guideline F, paragraphs 19 (a) and (c) and Guideline E, 
paragraph 16 (a), and precludes a finding that he has the requisite 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to have access to classified 
information. (FORM, page 2) 
Applicant was informed in the FORM that the delinquent obligations remained 
outstanding and that there was no evidence payments had been made. The FORM 
stated: 
. . . you shall have 30 days from the receipt of this information in which to 
submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate . . . If you do not file 
any objections or submit any additional information within 30 days of receipt 
of this letter, your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely on this file of relevant material. (FORM) 
No response to the FORM was received from Applicant. He did not provide any 
documentation as to payment on or showing the current status of his delinquent 
obligations. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
5 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed-upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s two unpaid judgments and three collection accounts total more than 
$17,000. The Government’s evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise security 
 
6 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c): “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” “(b) 
unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;” and “(c) a history of not 
meeting financial obligations.” The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. 
September 22, 2005)). 
 
 Four of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant provided no information as to the cause of his delinquent obligations 
other than his six months of incarceration, which occurred in 2009. He asserted that he 
had paid most of the delinquent obligations. However, he failed to provide any 
documentation corroborating payment on the debts.  
 
An applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously, but he is required to act responsibly given his 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
“concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant must show 
that significant action to implement the plan has occurred, which has not been presented.  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of any responsible steps he has taken to pay or 
resolve his delinquent obligations. There is no evidence the delinquent obligations 
occurred under unusual conditions. The failure to repay has persisted for numerous 
years. These delinquent obligations casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. In 2009, he was incarcerated for six 
 
7 
months, but that occurred more than seven years prior to the FORM. In November 2005, 
he was divorced, which was eleven years prior to the FORM. He failed to act responsibly 
under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling or clear indications that the delinquent 
obligations are being resolved or that Applicant’s finances are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. There is no showing of Applicant having made good-faith payments 
towards his delinquent obligations or evidence to establish that he is executing a 
reasonable ongoing plan to pay or resolve his debts. He asserted he had paid most of 
the SOR debts, but provided no documentation to support his claims of payment. AG ¶ 
20(d) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The concerns for personal conduct are articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 The undisputed evidence is that Applicant certified to the accuracy of his October 
2015 e-QIP on which he did not list his home foreclosure,3 repossession of his truck, his 
two unpaid judgments, or his other delinquent financial obligations. He stated he did not 
know the status of his repossessed truck and was unaware of some of his delinquent 
obligations. During his December 2015 interview, he provided no explanation as to his 
false answers concerning the delinquent obligations not being listed on his e-QIP. In his 
SOR Answer he stated he did not list the foreclosure on his home because he was worried 
that reporting the foreclosure would affect his opportunity for employment. 
 
 Of concern is Applicant’s demonstrated lack of trustworthiness in failing to honestly 
answer the financial questions on his October 2015 e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to the 
falsification, as follows:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Without any credible explanation to rebut the reasonable inference of falsification, 
the personal conduct security concerns remain.  
                                                          
3 Applicant’s failure to list the foreclosure on his home was not listed as an SOR personal conduct security 
concern. 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. It is noted Applicant served 
in the U.S. Marine Corps on active duty and in the Reserves. His unpaid judgments and 
unpaid collection accounts totaling more than $17,000. 
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s security concern about this 
delinquent obligations since his December 2015 interview when he was specifically 
confronted about his delinquent obligations. At that time, he said he would look into the 
debts and pay them within a year, if he owed them. Additionally, the August 2016 SOR 
and September 2016 FORM put him on notice of the Government’s concern about the 
delinquent obligations. The FORM specifically informed him there was no evidence that 
the delinquent obligations had been paid. There is no evidence he has contacted his 
creditors or negotiated any repayment agreements concerning the delinquent debts.  
 
In requesting a decision without a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written 
record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation showing any efforts to address 
the delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on only the 
limited response in his SOR Answer, the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns remain.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(c)) His delinquent obligations remain unpaid. He provided no 
explanation for his false answers on his October 2015 e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
 
9 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
