 
1 
 
 
            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01204 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
        Decision 
______________ 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                               Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) effective within 
the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
On December 10, 2016, Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, which revised and replaced the 2006. The new 
AGs became effective for all decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I 
have applied the newly revised AGs to this decision.1 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and elected to have her case decided on the 
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
                                                          
1 Although I have applied the new AGs that became effective on June 8, 2017, to this decision, I have 
also considered the case under the previous AGs and my decision would be no different under either 
version.  
 
2 
 
 
(FORM) on September 23, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on October 5, 2016, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and provided a two- 
page response to the FORM on November 16, 2016. Attached to her response was a 
Debt Management Plan. Also attached were receipts and confirmations showing that 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i were paid in full. The Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 through 
8 were admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
August 8, 2017.  
 
     Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant admitted to the Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing and 8 of the 11 allegations 
of delinquent debts in the SOR. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h as they are duplicate 
debts already charged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g; and she denied SOR ¶ 1.i as it was paid 
off recently.3 The alleged delinquent debts total more than $8,000. She also provided a  
two-page response to the FORM and provided supporting information marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A consisting of six pages of receipts and e-mail confirmations 
that she paid off SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, and the debt above at SOR ¶ 1.i. In addition, 
attached to her response were 18 pages of a Debt Management Plan (DMP) setting 
forth specific terms of re-payment of her remaining delinquent debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 
1.e, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.l. This is marked as AE B. The Green Path DMP included an 
electronic transfer of funds authorization signed by Applicant allowing her account to be 
debited twice a month for payments of $122.50. This $245 each month was sent to the 
DMP to execute her plan and pay off the remaining debts. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
           .    
  Applicant is 51 years old. She obtained her bachelor’s degree in 2009. She was 
married in 1988 and divorced in 2006. She has been employed as an administrative 
assistant by a federal contractor since April 2015. She reported in her 2015 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions, also known as her security clearance 
application (SCA) that she was fired in January 2015 by her employer, which was 
undergoing a reorganization. Then, she was unemployed for four months until she 
started her present job. She supported herself using savings and student loans during 
her period of unemployment.  
 
  Applicant disclosed her delinquent debts in section 26 of her February 2015 
SCA. These debts resulted from a trip to the emergency room (medical debts) when she 
had no health insurance coverage, delinquent student loans, and general credit card 
debt. She has produced evidence showing that she has made payments, and has 
automatic debits taken from her account, in the amount of $245 per month, since 
                                                          
2 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 8, 2015 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (GE 2); and her summary of clearance interview of January 22, 2016. 
 
3 Item 1, Answer to SOR, and AE A.  
 
 
3 
 
 
November 2016.4 That is when she consolidated her delinquent debts for re-payment 
and entered into an income-driven repayment plan with the DMP. Applicant ascribes her 
divorce, unemployment and mismanagement as the reasons for her financial problems 
in her clearance interview.5 In the same subject interview, she stated her intention to 
enter into a debt consolidation and repayment plan within six months.6 She has now 
established a payment plan and followed through on her statement to the clearance 
interview investigator.  
Applicant also disclosed that she filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy protection in 
August 2012, and $50,000 of consumer debts were discharged in January 2013. It was 
necessary for her to file for bankruptcy protection because after their divorce, her ex-
husband filed his own petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. Then, the creditors 
started coming after Applicant on their joint debts. She had only been employed 
sporadically and part time in most cases. She couldn’t keep up with her financial 
responsibilities. Applicant reports having no previous security clearance.  
                                                         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
4 AE B. 
 
5 Item 3, Summary of Subject Interview.  
 
6 Item 3. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
      Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant admitted to filing for bankruptcy protection and to 8 of the 11 delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and    
 
 (d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant endured divorce, unemployment, and an un-covered medical 
emergency. These conditions were beyond her control. She has acted responsibly to 
address these adverse circumstances. She disclosed her delinquent debts in her SCA, 
and she has since contacted her creditors to make payment arrangements and 
expressed her intent to pay all debts in full. She has a DMP and she is adhering to it. 
Applicant has produced evidence that she has followed through on this plan. She 
admitted to the Chapter 7 filing in SOR ¶ 1.a. She provided documentary evidence 
attached to her response to the FORM, to show progress on payments, or mitigation 
regarding the other eight delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20 (b) and 
20(d) apply. I am satisfied that her delinquent debts have been or are being resolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s finances are no longer a security concern. There are ample 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. She has met her 
burden of persuasion. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a -1.l:             For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    _____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
 
 
