 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03439 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).1 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on January 10, 2017. The case was 
assigned to me on February 15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
                                                          
 1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also 
considered this case under the previous version of the AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my 
conclusions are the same using either set of AG.  
 
 
2 
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 28, 2017, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on March 15, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits 
(AE) A through I, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open six 
weeks until April 28, 2017, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant failed 
to submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 
23, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted some of the SOR allegations with explanations, and denied 
others. The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. She is seeking an IT position with a defense contractor. 
She has been unemployed since 2010. Before that, she worked as an IT technician in 
the private sector. She has a high school diploma and has earned numerous technical 
certificates. She is twice divorced and remarried three years ago. She has no children, 
but raised her niece.2  
 
 The SOR alleged and Applicant admitted four delinquent medical accounts in a 
total amount of $4,642. The SOR also alleged Applicant’s indebtedness on four state 
tax liens totaling $16,265, a federal tax lien in the amount of $54,285, and her failure to 
file federal and state income tax returns for 2010 and 2011. The tax liens and medical 
debts are listed in credit reports from September 2015, and February 2017. She 
admitted in her security clearance application, her security clearance interview, and her 
hearing testimony not filing her 2010 and 2011 tax returns.3  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to her unemployment between 2010 
and 2017 when she was caring for her sister and mother. She was supported by her 
Social Security income of approximately $20,000 and in the last three years her 
husband’s retirement pension of approximately $110,000.4  
 
 Medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-c, 1.i) Applicant provided no documentation 
showing payment, or her entering into payment plans to resolve these debts. She 
presented documentation showing non-SOR medical debts, which showed her 
handwritten payment notes. She was unable to pay her medical debts because she 
lacked insurance coverage. She failed to provide evidence of financial counseling. 
These debts are unresolved.5 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 5, 24-25; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 33; GE 1-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
5 Tr. at 46; Ans.; GE 3-4; AE H. 
 
 
3 
 
 Tax Liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h). Applicant provided documentation showing that 
one state tax lien was set aside in February 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.e). She claimed she sent 
$3,000 to the state taxing authority in March 2017 to pay part of the tax owed in SOR ¶ 
1.d. She did not provide supporting documentation. Likewise, she failed to provide 
documentation showing payment or contacts with officials concerning the remaining tax 
liens. She specifically disputed the federal tax lien stated in SOR ¶ 1.g claiming that it 
was untimely, but she failed to provide documentation supporting her dispute. Except 
for SOR ¶ 1.e, all the tax liens are unresolved.6 
 
 Failure to file federal and state tax returns for 2010 and 2011 (SOR¶¶ 1.j-
1.k). Applicant admitted she failed to file his 2010 and 2011 federal and state income 
tax returns when they were due. However, it is unclear, based upon her income at the 
time ($20,000) if she was required to file. Since the Government failed to present 
evidence establishing that Applicant was required to file federal and state tax returns for 
those years, I find for Applicant on these allegations.7 
 
Character Evidence. 
 
 Applicant presented documentation and a letter showing that she provided 
valuable assistance as a witness in a lawsuit brought by a former employer. Her 
integrity and work ethic were noted. She has been recognized for her volunteer work to 
local schools, community theatre, and charitable organizations.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 29-30; GE 3-4; AE E. 
 
7 Tr. at 33-34, 42. 
 
8 AE A-B, F. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts and tax liens that remain unpaid. I find all the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant failed to show efforts toward resolving her debt and tax issues. This 
pattern shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
Applicant’s unemployment since 2010, to care for her mother and sister was a 
voluntary choice and not a condition beyond her control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
6 
 
 There is no evidence of Applicant receiving financial counseling. Applicant’s 
medical debts and federal and state tax liens remain unaddressed. Applicant’s financial 
problems are not under control. Evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve her 
debts is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. She was given extra time to 
provide documentation that she was working on resolving her tax liens, but she failed to 
do so. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s extended unemployment, her family circumstances, her 
letter of support, and her community volunteer efforts. However, I also considered that 
her medical debts and tax liens remain unpaid. She has not established a meaningful 
track record of debt management.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.j – 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
