 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00299 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated alleged foreign preference security concerns, but her evidence 
is insufficient to mitigate foreign influence concerns. Her closest living relatives, her 
parents, are citizens and residents of Pakistan, which exposes her to the potential of 
adverse foreign influence from hostile armed groups that operate somewhat freely within 
parts of Pakistan. Granting her a clearance under the present circumstances, and thereby 
placing the security of this nation’s secrets potentially at risk, would not be clearly 
consistent with the interest of national security. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with relatives and 
friends in Pakistan and her possession of a National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis 
(NICOP) raised security concerns under the foreign influence and foreign preference 
guidelines. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.1  
 
 On April 12, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and called a friend as a witness. The exhibits offered by the parties 
                                                          
1 The SOR was amended at hearing to strike allegations 2.d – 2.g. See Transcript (Tr.) 42. 
 
2 
 
were admitted into the administrative record without objection.2 The transcript of the 
proceeding was received on April 20, 2017, and the record closed on April 28, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 27, was born in the United States. When her parents divorced, her 
mother decided to return to her country of birth, Pakistan, with her then 11-year-old 
daughter (Applicant). Applicant lived with her mother in Pakistan until she turned 18. She 
then moved back to the United States to go to college.  
 
Applicant remained in the United States after graduating from college in 2014 and 
began her professional career as an engineer. She reconnected with old friends that she 
grew up with in the United States and made new ones through her school, job, and 
volunteer work. Currently, she is in a serious relationship with a young physician. She has 
turned her hobby in photography into a small business, selling her photographs online. 
Less than three years after graduating from college, Applicant’s U.S. retirement and 
brokerage savings accounts reflect a balance of approximately $30,000. She does not 
plan to move back to Pakistan, and anticipates her mother and stepfather will join her in 
the United States in the future.  
 
Shortly before or after Applicant left Pakistan, her mother and stepfather applied 
for a NICOP for her, so she could return to Pakistan to visit them without the need or 
expense of requesting a visa. Also, the NICOP is in Urdu, which the local police generally 
understand better than identification documents in English. Applicant always retained her 
U.S. passport while living in Pakistan, and never applied for or obtained a Pakistani 
passport. She has not applied for or accepted any privilege or benefit of Pakistani 
citizenship derived through her mother beyond the NICOP. She surrendered the NICOP 
to her facility security officer in July 2016. She recently traveled to Pakistan to visit her 
mother and stepfather (hereinafter, collectively referred to as her “parents”) using her U.S. 
passport and a visa.  
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Pakistan. They married in 2001, 
when Applicant was about 16 years old. They plan on moving to the United States at 
some point in the future, but remain in Pakistan caring for Applicant’s grandfather 
(stepfather’s father). Applicant’s stepfather served in the Pakistani military, including for 
some time in the Pakistani intelligence service. He retired from the Pakistani military 
nearly 30 years ago. He supports himself and his family financially through his Pakistani 
military retirement income and a stream of income through a private security business 
that he invested in some years ago. Applicant communicates frequently with her parents. 
She is not close to her other relatives in Pakistan. She submitted a security clearance 
application in 2015, in connection with her current employment and self-reported her 
foreign connections to Pakistan, including her then possession of the NICOP. 
 
  
                                                          
2 Government Exhibits 1 – 5; Applicant’s Exhibits A – R. The discovery letter, correspondence with the 
parties, the notice of hearing, and case management order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – IV. 
 
3 
 
Administrative Notice - The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan).3 
 
Pakistan is a federal republic. The United States has had diplomatic relations with 
Pakistan since its creation in 1947. Over the decades, the two countries’ relationship has 
been guided by their common interests in a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region. The 
United States is Pakistan’s largest trading partner and one of the largest sources of 
foreign direct investment in Pakistan. 
 
The September 11, 2001 attacks led to closer coordination between Pakistan and 
the United States on security and stability issues in South Asia. Notwithstanding recent 
efforts by the Pakistani military against terrorist and other extremist groups within 
Pakistan’s borders, the United States remains concerned about these groups’ ability to 
operate, plan, and conduct domestic, regional, and global attacks from safe havens within 
Pakistan. The presence of these groups in Pakistan poses a significant threat to U.S. 
citizens and U.S. interests. These groups have carried out attacks against the United 
States, the Pakistani government, and the citizens of both countries. The U.S. State 
Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan because of 
the danger posed by the presence of these groups and other armed extremist elements.  
 
Recent U.S. State Department reports reflect that serious human rights violations 
have occurred in Pakistan. These reports also reflect that corruption within Pakistani 
society remains a significant problem. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).4  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
                                                          
3 The matters accepted for administrative notice are taken from Exhibit 5, as updated by current U.S. State 
Department documents, namely, the State Department’s fact sheet on U.S. relations with Pakistan (Jan. 
24, 2017); travel warning (updated May 22, 2017); and 2016 human rights report on Pakistan (executive 
summary). These documents are publically available on the State Department’s website (state.gov), and 
are appended to the record as App. Exh. V. 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). I considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that 
were in effect at the time the SOR was issued, and my decision would have been the same. 
 
4 
 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 A security concern arises when a person acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States. Such action may indicate that the 
person may provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the United States. 
However, foreign citizenship by itself does not raise a security concern under Guideline 
C, unless the foreign citizenship is in conflict with U.S. national security interests or the 
 
5 
 
person attempted to conceal the information about his or her foreign citizenship. See 
generally AG ¶ 9. The facts and circumstances about how Applicant ended up obtaining 
and possessing a NICOP does not raise a foreign preference concern. She self-reported 
this information on her security clearance application. Accordingly, the Guideline C 
allegation is decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a national security concern if they create 
circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests. 
Likewise, a concern arises if a person’s connections, contacts, or interests in a foreign 
country leave them vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. At the same 
time, a person is not per se disqualified from holding a security clearance because they 
have familial or other ties to a foreign country. Instead, in assessing a person’s potential 
vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign country involved, the 
country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.5  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
                                                          
5 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors 
an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle, in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”6 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.7 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate somewhat freely, such an 
applicant faces a very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their 
connections to and contacts with foreign relatives.8 
 
 Here, the record evidence reflects that Applicant has a strong relationship with her 
mother and stepfather. They are her closest living relatives and, although they are well 
off in Pakistan and live in a secure compound, the danger posed by terrorist and other 
hostile elements operating in Pakistan is a grave and ever present concern, as reflected 
in recent and past State Department travel warnings. In light of the dangerous conditions 
in Pakistan and Applicant’s close relationship to her parents, elements hostile to the 
United States could attempt to adversely influence her through her parents. Although 
Applicant has rebuilt strong personal, financial, and professional bonds to the United 
States since she returned to the United States, such is insufficient to fully mitigate the 
heightened security concerns raised by her present circumstances.9   
 
However, I want to make it clear that this adverse security assessment is not a 
comment on Applicant’s patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people 
may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved 
one, such as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
  
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
9 Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Although AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(e) have some limited 
applicability, these mitigating factors and the other favorable record evidence, including Applicant’s honesty 
and candor throughout the security clearance process, are insufficient to mitigate the heightened security 
concerns raised by her parent’s residence in Pakistan. Applicant’s connections to and contact with distant 
relatives and others in Pakistan is minimal and does not raise a security concern. SOR 2.c, which alleges 
these foreign connections, is decided in her favor.  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:               For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 2.d – 2.g:         Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied.10 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 In light of Applicant’s compelling mitigation case, I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix 
C. However, none appear warranted at this time nor sufficient to lessen the serious security concerns at 
issue. See generally SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h); contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 28, 2011) (under previous version of the guidelines, judges had “no authority to grant an interim, 
conditional or probationary clearance.”)  
