 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01755 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption and Guideline F, financial considerations. He mitigated security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.1 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2016, and August 5, 2016, and 
requested a hearing. The case was assigned me on January 18, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 13, 2017, 
and the hearing was held as scheduled on April 11, 2017. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but 
did not offer any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
April 19, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw the allegation stated in SOR ¶ 1.b since 
it was a duplicate of the allegation stated in SOR ¶ 1.a. There being no objection, I 
granted the motion. My formal findings will reflect that SOR ¶ 1.b was withdrawn. 
Additionally, Department Counsel moved to amend the allegation stated in SOR ¶ 3.a to 
substitute “2.a” for “1.a” in the last sentence of SOR ¶ 3.a. The motion was granted and 
the allegation was so amended.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations, except for SOR ¶ 3.a, 
which he denied. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is divorced and has no children. He has worked for 
a defense contractor since 2012. He served in the Air Force for six years and was 
honorably discharged as a senior airman in 2012 (pay grade of E-4). He deployed to 
Iraq in 2007. He is a high school graduate and has taken some college courses.3   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was charged with driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI) on three occasions: December 2011, February 2015, and March 2015 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c-1.d). The SOR also alleged Applicant had a charged-off account in the 
amount of $10,675 (SOR ¶ 2.a). Finally, the SOR alleged Applicant deliberately 
provided untruthful information when completing his August 2015 security clearance 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 Tr. 10-12. 
 
3 Tr. 6, 21-22, 24; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
application (SCA) by answering “no” to a question about whether he had any charged-
off financial accounts in the past seven years (SOR ¶ 3.a). 
  
Alcohol Incidents 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol socially with his friends when he was about 19 
years old. He routinely drank two to three times a week and consumed approximately 
three drinks per sitting if he was driving and approximately five to six drinks if he was 
not driving. He continued consuming this quantity up until his last DUI arrest in March 
2015.4   
 
 In September 2011, Applicant was back in his home state on leave from the Air 
Force. He was going through his divorce and decided to go out drinking with some 
friends. On his way home, he was stopped by law enforcement for erratic driving. He 
failed the field sobriety tests that were administered and was arrested for DUI. He 
pleaded guilty and was sentenced to four days of jail time, fines, and ordered to attend 
alcohol education classes. He complied with the terms of his sentence. He attended his 
alcohol education classes through the Air Force Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention 
and Treatment program (ADAPT).5   
 
 In February 2015, Applicant was drinking alcohol because a family member 
recently died. On his way home from the bar, he was stopped by law enforcement for 
erratic driving. He was given and failed field sobriety tests. He was arrested for DUI. 
Before his February 2015 DUI charge was adjudicated, he was arrested again for DUI in 
March 2015. He drank two to three beers at the same bar he frequented in February 
then proceeded to drive home. He was stopped by law enforcement for running a stop 
sign. He was arrested for DUI. In a plea agreement reached with the prosecution, 
Applicant pleaded guilty to one charge of DUI, while the other charge was dismissed. 
He was sentenced to 10 days of jail time, fines, 48 hours of community service, 
mandatory Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) attendance, two years of having an ignition lock 
on his vehicle, and two years’ probation. His probation is scheduled to end in 
September 2017.6  
 
 Applicant indicated he initially sought alcohol treatment from the VA (no date 
provided), but he has not followed up on his initial inquiry. He stated that he is an 
irregular attendee of AA (since March 2015 has attended 33 AA meetings). He failed to 
present documentation concerning any past alcohol education or treatment. He testified 
that he has not been diagnosed as having an alcohol use disorder. He claims 
abstinence since March 2015. When asked about future use of alcohol, he stated he did 
                                                          
4 GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 24-26; GE 2, 3. 
 
6 Tr. 27-29; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
not think he would use it, but he did not rule out doing so in the future. As of April 2016, 
he was in compliance with the terms of his probation.7 
 
Finances 
 
 The sole delinquent account is an automobile repossession in an amount of 
$10,650. Two credit reports verify this debt, along with Applicant’s admission. He claims 
this debt was incurred when he financed the purchase of an automobile for a friend in 
January 2013. The friend was supposed to make the monthly payments, but she failed 
to do so and the car was repossessed. After the car was sold, the creditor came to 
Applicant for the deficiency balance. Applicant claimed he has called the creditor five to 
six times to resolve this debt. He did not present proof of payment or the details of a 
payment plan. He also stated he paid nine other non-SOR debts, but he did not provide 
supporting documentation. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant failed to list the charged-off automobile debt on his SCA. During his 
background interview with a defense investigator in November 2015, he voluntarily 
provided the investigator information about the delinquent account before he was 
confronted with the debt.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 29-3; GE 6. 
 
8 Tr. 32-33, 35; GE 4, 5. 
 
9 Tr. 38-39; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and  
 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s three DUI arrests, most recently in 2015 (the last two just one month 
apart) support the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s last adverse alcohol incident occurred in March 2015, one month 
after he was charged with his second DUI since 2011. His alcohol-related incidents 
have not been infrequent having been arrested or charged three times since 2011. He 
remains on probation from his latest DUI conviction. Based upon his past record, I 
cannot conclude that an alcohol-related incident will not recur in the future. His actions 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant apparently sought treatment from a VA facility, but he has not followed 
up. He did not present documentation of any treatment program. He claims that he has 
attended 33 AA classes since 2015. Although he claims abstinence since March 2015, 
he has done so in the artificial environment of being on probation. It is unclear what he 
will do once his probation ends. AG ¶ 23(b) and AG ¶ 23(d) partially apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had a delinquent automobile debt that remains unpaid. I find both the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant failed to show efforts toward resolving his debt. This shows a lack of 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant chose to fund a car loan for a friend. When the friend failed to make the 
payments, the creditor turned to Applicant for payment. Although Applicant claims he 
made several contacts with the creditor over the years, he failed to present evidence 
that he took responsible action to resolve this debt. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of Applicant receiving financial counseling. Applicant’s debt 
remain unaddressed. Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Evidence of 
good-faith efforts to pay or resolve his debt is lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to list the charged-off car loan on his SCA. He was aware of the 
loan, since he admitted contacting the creditor several times to try to resolve it. AG ¶ 
16(a) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 Applicant disclosed his delinquent car loan during his background investigation 
with a defense investigator in November 2015. The investigator’s report indicates that 
Applicant “volunteered” this information. AG ¶ 17(a) applies. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, including his deployment to Iraq, his compliance with his current probation, and 
his personal circumstances. However, I also considered that he has had three DUI 
incidents since 2011 and failed to pay a $10,000 debt for which he is responsible. 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol consumption and 
financial consideration security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines G and F, 
but he did mitigate the concerns under Guideline E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.b:     Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.c - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph   3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
