 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-00455 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate alleged foreign influence 
security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with relatives in 
Pakistan and Hong Kong raised a security concern under the foreign influence guideline. 
The SOR also alleged that Applicant’s past possession of a foreign passport raised 
concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference), but Department Counsel withdrew that 
allegation. Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer).  
 
 By agreement of the parties, the hearing was held on September 19, 2017. 
Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the 
administrative record without objection.1 The transcript of the proceeding was received 
on September 26, 2017. 
 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 – 3; Applicant’s Exhibits A – D. The discovery letter, Department Counsel’s 
withdrawal of the Guideline C allegation, correspondence, the notice of hearing, and the case management 
order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – V. 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant was born in Pakistan. She and her family left Pakistan in 1998, and 
settled in Hong Kong. She immigrated to the United States in 2008. She became a U.S. 
citizen in 2015. She has not visited Pakistan in 15 years, and last visited Hong Kong over 
five years ago. She renounced her foreign citizenship and returned her Hong Kong 
passport in 2015.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s relationship with her parents and brother, who 
are citizens and residents of foreign countries, raise a security concern. Applicant’s 
mother recently died. She was living in Hong Kong until her death. After her mother’s 
death, Applicant’s father returned to live in Pakistan. He is semi-retired, working part time 
at a private school. He has no connection to the Pakistani government or military. 
Applicant has limited, infrequent contact with her father, generally by text message. 
 
Applicant’s brother resides in Hong Kong with his family. He works in the private 
financial sector. Applicant’s relationship with her brother is strained. They practically have 
no contact with each other. She tries to remember to text him once a year on his birthday. 
When she last visited Hong Kong about five years ago, Applicant did not visit with her 
brother. He has no connection to any foreign government.  
 
After immigrating to the United States, Applicant earned an undergraduate degree. 
She is a certified public accountant. She married in 2010, and she and her husband 
recently celebrated the birth of their first child. She and her husband purchased their home 
in 2013 for approximately $450,000, and a current mortgage statement reflects a 
$370,000 balance. Applicant also co-owns with her sister two investment properties in the 
United States. Applicant is close, physically and otherwise, to her sister and her sister’s 
family. Applicant’s sister and her best friend are U.S. citizens.  
 
Applicant was hired by her current employer in 2015, and her 2016 tax return 
reflects that she and her husband’s adjusted gross income totaled over $200,000. She 
closed her foreign bank accounts. Applicant’s assets, properties, and financial interests 
are in the United States. Besides her home and investment properties, Applicant has 
savings and retirement accounts in the United States. Before the recent birth of her child, 
Applicant was active in her community. She received a certificate of appreciation from 
another federal government agency for her outstanding public service contributions.  
 
In 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application in connection with 
her current employment. She disclosed and reported her foreign connections. She then 
discussed her foreign connections, contacts, and travel with an investigator who 
conducted her security clearance background interview. She has no connections to or 
contacts with any foreign government or entity.  
 
  
 
3 
 
Administrative Notice - The Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan). 
 
Pakistan is a federal republic. The United States has had diplomatic relations with 
Pakistan since its creation in 1947. Over the decades, the two countries’ relationship has 
been guided by their common interests in a peaceful, stable, and prosperous region.  
 
The September 11, 2001 attacks led to closer coordination between Pakistan and 
the United States on security and stability issues in South Asia. Notwithstanding recent 
efforts by the Pakistani military against terrorist and other extremist groups within 
Pakistan’s borders, the United States remains concerned about these groups’ ability to 
operate, plan, and conduct domestic, regional, and global attacks from safe havens within 
Pakistan. The presence of these groups in Pakistan pose a significant threat to U.S. 
citizens and U.S. interests. These groups have carried out attacks against the United 
States, the Pakistani government, and the citizens of both countries. The U.S. State 
Department warns U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Pakistan because of 
the danger posed by the presence of these groups and other armed extremist elements.  
 
Recent U.S. State Department reports reflect that serious human rights violations 
have occurred in Pakistan. These reports also reflect that corruption within Pakistani 
society remains a significant problem. 
 
Administrative Notice – China & Hong Kong. 
 
From 1842 to June 30, 1997, Hong Kong was a British colony. Those born in Hong 
Kong during this time were considered British subjects. On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong 
reverted to Chinese sovereignty as a Special Administrative Region of the People’s 
Republic of China (China or PRC). Hong Kong maintains some autonomy from the PRC, 
which the United States supports under the “one country, two systems” framework. 
However, the PRC maintains authority on foreign relations and national defense. The 
PRC has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The 
PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its 
practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and 
mistreatment of prisoners. The PRC actively engages in acts of espionage against the 
United States. The U.S. State Department warns visitors to China that they may be placed 
under surveillance. Hotel rooms, offices, cars, taxis, internet usage, and fax machines 
may be monitored onsite or remotely, and personal possessions in hotel rooms, including 
computers, may be searched. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4).2  
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards).  
 
4 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.3 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
                                                          
3 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 12-11375 (App. Bd. June 17, 2016). 
 
5 
 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests are a national security concern if they result in 
divided allegiance. Likewise, a concern arises if a person’s connections, contacts, or 
interests in a foreign country leave them vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign 
interest. However, a person is not per se disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have familial or other ties to a foreign country. Instead, in assessing a 
person’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign country 
involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.4  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact . . .  with a foreign family member . . . if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
                                                          
4 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors 
an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle, in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”5 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.6 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a hostile foreign 
country or a country where elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate 
somewhat freely, such an applicant faces a very heavy burden in mitigating security 
concerns raised by their connections to and contacts with foreign relatives.7 
 
 Here, Applicant does not have a close relationship to her father or brother. Beyond 
these weak familial relationships, Applicant has no foreign connections. She has clearly 
established a life for herself and her family in the United States. Each of the above listed 
mitigating conditions apply in full or in part. After considering the potential security 
concern posed by Applicant’s foreign familial ties, the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and the whole-person factors,8 I find that she presented sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concern.9  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:          For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):  WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:           Withdrawn 
 
  
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
8 See AG ¶ 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (affirming grant involving equally weak foreign familial 
relationships). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
