 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 16-04068 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 25, 2015. 
On February 21, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.1  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations in a three-page statement with amplifying explanations. Attached were 
seven letters to the creditors proposing compromise settlement offers or asking for 
validation of the alleged delinquent debts. Applicant sent these settlement proposals to 
each creditor by certified mail. Also attached was a power point slide entitled “Debt 
Resolution Strategy” in which Applicant established a time-line for action to resolve the 
alleged delinquent debts. He accomplished most of his stated objectives. The alleged 
delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. total approximately $15,000. Applicant also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 2, 2017. On May 19, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for June 21, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted documents, which were 
marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2017. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the 
record open until July 11, 2017, so that he could provide substantiating documentation.2 
He provided one additional document, which was a $350 cashier’s check dated July 7, 
2017, to the collection agency for the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d establishing payment in full.  
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He graduated from high school in 1994, and took some 
colleges courses, but did not obtain a degree. Applicant has been pending a job as an 
engineer technician with a federal contractor, contingent on obtaining a security 
clearance, since September 2014. Applicant was married in 1998 and divorced in 2007. 
He has one son, age 19 from that marriage. Applicant re-married in 2008 and he has 
another son, age 18 months. Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
1996 to 2016 and received an honorable discharge and numerous awards. Applicant 
had a previous security clearance while he was in the Navy. He did not disclose any 
delinquent debts in section 26 of his October 2015 SCA. 
 
                                                          
1 Although I have decided this case under the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective June 8, 2017, I also 
considered the case under the former AG effective on September 1, 2006, and my decision would be the 
same under either version.  
 
2 Tr. at 36. 
 
3 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s October 25, 2015 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) and the summary of his security clearance interview on March 30, 
2016.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that near the end of his career in the Navy, he was presented 
with the 2015 SCA late in the afternoon and told by his superior that it had to be 
completed by the morning. At that point, it was nebulous whether or not he actually 
needed to complete it because Applicant was not sailing on the next deployment with 
his unit. Thus, his SCA was rushed and hastily completed. His failure to disclose the 
delinquent debts was a clerical error or oversight and he had no specific intent to 
deceive the government when he completed it.4  
 
The SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $15,167. 
Applicant admitted to these delinquent or charged-off debts in his Answer to the SOR. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he has maintained a security clearance for over 
20 years with no issues. The largest delinquent debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h, was placed 
for collection in the amount of $10,662 for a repossessed Toyota in 2004. Applicant 
testified that he was in the throes of a separation from his first wife, and he wound up 
with sole custody of his son. He was overwhelmed and could not keep up with the car 
payments. The car was repossessed approximately a week and a half before a 
scheduled six month deployment at sea.5 Applicant does not know how much money 
the car was resold for by the creditor. He has reached out to the creditor and is 
attempting to track this information down. 
 
Applicant disputes the delinquent medical debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.i. This was for 
an unnecessary ambulance ride when his young son received a minor injury at school, 
and the school officials procured an ambulance for $693 without first contacting 
Applicant or his wife. Applicant was five minutes away. He is actively disputing this 
debt.6  
 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence at AE A through AE G corroborating 
his testimony that he has either attempted to settle, or has paid in full, the delinquent 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g.7 The debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e and 1.f 
have been resolved. The other delinquent debts alleged are being disputed (¶¶ 1.c and 
1.i) or Applicant is actively pursuing settlement efforts.  
 
                                     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 56. 
 
5 Tr. at 62, 63. 
 
6 Tr. at 63-65. 
 
7 Tr. at 24-40. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, clearance interview and answer to the SOR. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 
19(c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.8 Applicant has met that burden.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . ., and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
                                                          
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 Applicant was separated in 2004 and divorced in 2007. He was assigned sole 
custody of his young son, while trying to maintain his active duty navy career as a 
submariner. To some extent, these conditions were beyond his control. He has now 
produced relevant and responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has met his burden to provide sufficient 
evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his debts were 
incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The delinquent debts have 
been resolved or are being resolved. The mitigating conditions enumerated above apply 
with the exception of AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes….  
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
 
7 
 
 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government  
representative.  
 
 Since Applicant denied any intent to provide false information as alleged at SOR 
¶ 2.a, his intent is an issue. Under ¶ E3.1.14 of DOD Directive 5220.6, the Government 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and evidence on facts alleged in the SOR that 
have been controverted. Intent can be inferred or determined from the circumstances. 
Applicant felt rushed when he completed his SCA online and the failure to disclose his 
delinquent debts was an oversight vice a deliberate falsification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant 
has addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative measures to 
resolve them. He has met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a security concern. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. The record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and that the 
disqualifying conditions for Guideline E, personal conduct, were not established.  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:              For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                                   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                    Administrative Judge 
 
