 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01326 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 17, 2015. 
On August 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. My decision is based on the guidelines in SEAD 4, referred to in this decision as “AG.” The changes 
resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 11, 2016, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 7, 2016. On November 8, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. She 
received the FORM on November 14, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on September 7, 2017.  
 
The FORM included Item 3, a summary of a personal subject interview (PSI) 
conducted on March 26, 2015. The PSI was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ 
E3.1.20. Department Counsel informed Applicant that she was entitled to comment on 
the accuracy of the PSI summary; make any corrections, additions, deletions or updates; 
or object to consideration of the PSI on the ground that it was not authenticated. I 
conclude that Applicant waived any objection to Item 3 by failing to respond to the FORM. 
Although pro se applicants are not expected to act like lawyers, they are expected to take 
timely and reasonable steps to protect their rights under the Directive. ISCR Case No. 
12-10810 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2016). 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old consulting configuration analyst employed by defense 
contractors since July 1980. (Item 3 at 4.) She earned a bachelor’s degree in June 1995. 
(Item 3 at 4.) She married in May 2000 and divorced in June 2006. She married her 
current spouse in July 2011, after cohabiting with him since December 2008. (Item 3 at 
5.) She has no children. She has held a security clearance for more than 30 years. (Item 
3 at 5.)  
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts: a $17,689 debt charged off in January 
2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a); a charge account referred for collection of $10,490 in January 2010 
(SOR ¶ 1.b); and an installment account referred for collection of $6,139 in September 
2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c). The alleged debts are reflected in a credit report from May 2015 (FORM 
Item 4). The credit report reflects that Applicant disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
She denied all three allegations in her answer to the SOR.  
 
 Applicant disclosed six delinquent debts in her SCA and during the March 2015 
PSI. She stated that two debts, for $11,000 and $10,500, were forgiven and that she 
received IRS Form 1099s and paid taxes on the forgiven debts. Four of the debts 
disclosed in the SCA were unresolved at the time of the PSI, and one of them, a charged-
off debt for $17,689, is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The other three debts listed in her SCA were 
not reflected as delinquent in the May 2015 credit report. During the PSI, Applicant was 
confronted with two additional unresolved debts, which were reflected in the May 2015 
credit report and alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (FORM Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 3
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she submitted a credit report from September 
2016, which did not reflect the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. A credit report from 
November 2016, included in the FORM as Item 5, also did not reflect the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. However, all three credit reports in the record reflected the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
The absence of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in the September 2016 credit report 
indicates that it was resolved. It would not have “aged off” the credit report under the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) because it was charged off in January 2010, less than seven 
years before the date of the credit report.3. The May 2015 credit report reflected that 
Applicant disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and the absence of this debt in the 
September 2016 credit report indicates that the dispute was resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
This debt also would not have “aged off” under the FCRA, because more than seven 
years had not elapsed since it was referred for collection in September 2009. Applicant 
provided no evidence of payments, payment agreements, or other resolution of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
In the PSI, Applicant attributed her financial problems to her husband’s injury in a 
motorcycle accident in August 2009, which left him unable to work as a self-employed 
barber until 2010, when he started to rebuild his business. As of the date of the PSI, he 
still had not been able to generate the level of income he enjoyed before his injury. (Item 
3 at 10.) Although they did not marry until July 2011, they bought a home together in 
December 2008. (Item 3 at 5.) She stated that she attempted to resolve her financial 
problems with a credit counselor, but she could not afford the monthly payment required 
consolidate her debts. She provided no documentation and no further information about 
credit counseling. 
 
The September 2016 credit report reflected that Applicant’s monthly $2,187 
payments on her home mortgage loan were current. It reflected that she had nine open 
credit-card accounts that were current and a line of credit that was current. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of 
limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to this debt. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
 4
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
  
 
 5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s May 2015 credit report and the summary of the PSI establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG 
¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
 6
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are not yet fully resolved. They 
were numerous and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. Applicant’s 
husband’s injury and inability to work were conditions largely beyond her control. She has 
acted responsibly regarding several delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR by 
contacting her creditors and successfully resolving them. She consulted with a credit 
counselor but could not afford the payments on the plan suggested by the counselor. She 
has remained current on her home mortgage loan payments and all her open credit-card 
accounts. However, she presented no evidence of responsible conduct regarding the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant provided no evidence that the counseling 
she received was provided by “a legitimate and credible source.”  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established. A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection 
process, and the adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments 
on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged in the SOR first, or establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant needs only to establish a plan 
to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
Applicant began resolving her delinquent debts before she submitted her SCA in 
February 2015. She disclosed six delinquent debts in her SCA and had resolved two of 
them by the time of the PSI in March 2015. Only three delinquent debts were reflected in 
the May 2015 credit report, and one of them was disputed. Her most recent credit report 
from November 2016 reflected only one unresolved debt. There is no evidence that she 
intentionally avoided dealing with her creditors, hoping that the debts would eventually 
fall off her credit record. See ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) 
(Merely waiting for a debt to drop off a credit report by the passage of time is not a factor 
in an applicant’s favor).  
 
The evidence reflects a credible and reasonable plan and significant actions to 
implement it. After considering Applicant’s many years of employment by defense 
contractors while holding a security clearance and her systematic resolution of her 
 
 7
delinquent debts, I am confident that she will resolve the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b as 
soon as she is financially able.4 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. There is no evidence 
that she disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). I have considered that Applicant has 
worked for defense contractors and held a security clearance for many years. She was 
open and candid about her financial problems throughout the security clearance process. 
She has made significant progress in regaining financial stability.  
 
 Applicant’s long record of employment while holding a security clearance and her 
resolution of all but one delinquent debt make it unlikely that she will trigger the concern 
in AG ¶ 18 about a “greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable 
acts to general funds.” After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 Administrative judges do not have authority to grant conditional clearances. ISCR Case No. 01-24328, 
2003 WL 21979745 at *2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2003). However, if Applicant fails to continue on her path of 
responsible conduct, her failure may prompt reconsideration of her suitability for holding a security 
clearance. See ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). 
 
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 8
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
