 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 16-00315 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems for several years. He did not submit any 
information that shows he is addressing his debts. His request for eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On April 14, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information 
as required for his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have access to classified information.1 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive. 
 
2 
 
 
On May 27, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2 At the 
time the SOR was written, the DOD CAF applied the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. On December 10, 2016, the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) issued a new set of AGs, effective for all security 
clearance adjudications conducted on or after June 8, 2017. I have based my 
recommended decision in this case on the June 8, 2017 AGs.3  
 
 Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On August 24, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)4 in support of 
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 29, 2016, and had 30 days from the 
date of receipt to object to the use of the information included in the FORM and to 
submit additional information in response to the FORM.5 Applicant did not provide any 
additional information in response to the FORM. I received the case on June 5, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes $17,007 for 12 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.l). Applicant denied SOR 1.h. He admitted 
the remaining debts and averred that the debt at SOR 1.j is a duplicate of SOR 1.i. He 
did not provide any supporting or explanatory information with his Answer. In addition to 
the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom he has 
worked since March 2014. He served in the United States Navy from December 2000 
until receiving an honorable discharge in August 2012. Applicant was unemployed for 
about nine months after leaving the military. He then worked for a different defense 
contractor from May 2013 until starting his current job. Applicant held a security 
clearance until October 2011, when, according to his answer to e-QIP Section 25, the 
Navy revoked his clearance because of security concerns about his finances. (FORM, 
Item 3) 
 
 Credit reports obtained during Applicant’s background investigation document 
the debts alleged in the SOR. The more recent credit report, obtained in April 2016, 
does not reflect the state tax debt alleged at SOR 1.h, which Applicant has denied. SOR 
1.h is resolved for Applicant. The information about the debts alleged at SOR 1.i and 1.j 
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 2. 
3 My decision in this case would have been the same under either version of the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. In the FORM, Department Counsel relies on five enclosed 
exhibits (Items 1 - 5). 
5 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 
 
 
3 
 
tends to support Applicant’s claim that they pertain to the same account. SOR 1.j is 
resolved for Applicant. (FORM, Items 4 and 5) 
 
 Applicant was married from December 2003 until divorcing in November 2011. 
He has three children (ages 5, 11, and 14) from his marriage. According to one of the 
Government’s credit reports, he is current on his child support payments. (FORM, Items 
3 and 5) 
 
Policies 
         
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,6 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
  (1)The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient 
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a 
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.8 If the Government meets its burden, it then falls 
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.9  
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
                                                 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 Directive, E3.1.14. 
9 Directive, E3.1.15. 
 
4 
 
them to have access to protected information.10 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.11 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s debts reasonably raised the 
security concern expressed at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
Applicant has been experiencing significant financial problems since at least 
2011. Available information shows that, aside from a state tax lien, Applicant has not 
addressed any of the debts alleged in the SOR and documented in his credit reports. 
The manner in which the tax lien was resolved is unclear from this record. This 
information requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to 
satisfy debts); 19(b) (unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so); 
and 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
 
 I have also considered whether the record supports application of any of the AG 
¶ 20 mitigating conditions. I conclude it does not. Some of Applicant’s recent debts may 
have arisen from his divorce and his post-Navy unemployment. However, it was 
incumbent on him to present information that makes such a connection. It also was his 
burden to show what, if any, action he has taken to resolve his debts. Applicant has 
                                                 
10 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
11 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
been gainfully employed since May 2013, yet he did not provide any such information. 
The security concerns about his finances remain unmitigated.  
  
 In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate 
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the 
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). Despite his honorable military 
service and his apparent fulfillment of his financial support obligations, doubts about his 
suitability remain because there is no indication Applicant is addressing his financial 
problems. Because protection of the interests of national security is the principal focus 
of these adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of 
access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, 1.l: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for security clearance eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
                                             
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
