KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant contends the record contains no evidence to support the Judge’s statement
that Applicant’s employer “presumably had a drug-free workplace policy.” We note the Drug-
Free Workplace Act requires Federal contractors with a contact over $100,000 to establish
certain drug-free workplace policies. Since Applicant works for a major defense contractor, we
find no error in the Judge’s statement that her employer presumably has such policies. Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00578.a1
DATE: 09/26/2017
DATE: September 26, 2017
In Re:
-------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00578
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On  July
30, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On July 6, 2017, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a Federal contractor.  In 2003, she was granted a
security clearance after disclosing in her security clearance application (SCA) that she used
marijuana three times in 1999.
In her SCA submitted in 2015, Applicant stated that her security clearance lapsed after ten
years because her job did not require it and disclosed that she used marijuana three times during
2014 and 2015.  This use of marijuana occurred in social setting with close friends.  Her last use
occurred about five months before she completed the SCA.  In her Answer to the SOR, she stated
that she had no desire to use marijuana in the future and that she avoided environments where
marijuana is present.  She denied having a continuing association with people who use illegal drugs
and explained the person with whom she used marijuana no longer uses it.
Applicant used marijuana in 2014-2015 when she was a mature, working adult in a
responsible position.  Although she did not have a security clearance during that period, she
previously held one, was employed in the defense industry,  and should have known marijuana was
off limits.  Her recent use of marijuana raises serious doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness,
and good judgment.   While she receives credit for self-reporting her marijuana use, she presented
little in the way of mitigation.  She has not provided sufficient evidence to establish that she has
unquestionably ruled out future marijuana use. 
 
Discussion
Applicant contends the record contains no evidence to support the Judge’s statement that
Applicant’s employer “presumably had a drug-free workplace policy.”   Appeal Brief at 4-5, citing 
Decision at 5.  We note the Drug-Free Workplace Act requires Federal contractors with a contact
over $100,000 to establish certain drug-free workplace policies.1  Since Applicant works for a major
defense contractor, we find no error in the Judge’s statement that her employer presumably has such
policies.    
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not weigh and consider all relevant evidence.  She
cites to such matters as the amount of time that has passed since her last use of marijuana, her
disassociation with drug-using individuals, and her honesty throughout the security clearance
process.  The Judge, however, made findings about those matters.  Her arguments are neither
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor
enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
1 See, 41 U.S. Code § 8101-8106.  See also, the Federal Acquisition Regulation, 48 C.F.R § 52.223-6, Drug
-Free Workplace.
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03747 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2015).  We give due
consideration to the Hearing Office case that Applicant has cited, but it is neither binding precedent
on the Appeal Board nor sufficient to undermine the Judge’s decision.  Id.  Additionally, the Judge
complied with the requirements of the Directive in his whole-persons analysis by considering the
totality of the evidence in reaching his decision. 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A. ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
