 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 16-01918 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On February 6, 2015, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On September 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, which became 
effective on September 1, 2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs).  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under the foreign influence 
guideline. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
On September 27, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and he 
requested a decision without a hearing. On October 19, 2016, Department Counsel 
completed the File of Relevant Material (FORM). On October 26, 2016, Applicant 
received the FORM. He did not submit any information within the 30 days after receiving 
the FORM. On August 10, 2017, the case was assigned to me. The case file consists of 
four exhibits, all of which are admitted. (Items 1-4)  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
As part of the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about China. The request is included with the FORM 
as Item 4. Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the request that are supported by source documents from official U.S. 
Government publications. The facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 Applicant submitted a mixed response to the nine allegations contained in his 
SOR. He admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and partially admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.i 
that included updates or clarifications. Those admitted allegations or allegations as 
partially admitted and updated or clarified are accepted as findings of fact. Additional 
findings of fact follow. 
 
Applicant is a 68-year-old chief communications system engineer employed by a 
defense contractor since 2007.3 He was born, raised, and educated in China through his 
bachelor’s degree awarded in 1982. In 1983, Applicant immigrated to the United States 
to attend graduate school, where he earned a master’s degree in 1985 and a doctorate 
degree in 1991. In 1999, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, and was issued a U.S. 
passport in 2008 that expires in 2018. Applicant did have a Chinese passport that was 
issued in 1992 and expired in 1999.  
                                            
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available in the 
cited exhibits. 
 
3 The source of the information in this subsection is Applicant’s February 6, 2015 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86) and Applicant’s SOR answer. (Items 3, 4)  
 
3 
                                         
 
Applicant taught at a prestigious Chinese university as an adjunct professor from 
2004 to 2007 and it was during this timeframe that he met his current wife and 
stepdaughter, both Chinese-born citizens. His wife was also employed at the same 
university where Applicant was teaching. He married his current wife in 2010 at a 
ceremony in the United States.  In 2016, Applicant’s wife retired from the Chinese 
university where she was employed, and is receiving a monthly pension of about $1,240.   
 
In addition to his stepdaughter, Applicant has three biological children from two 
previous marriages -- a Chinese-born adult son, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen and 
resides in China; and two U.S.-born adult sons, who reside in the United States. 
Applicant’s stepdaughter, a Chinese citizen, resides in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s SOR lists nine allegations under this concern that include having a wife, 
a sister, and stepdaughter, who are citizens of China; a sister, mother-in-law and father-
in-law, who are resident citizens of China; owning property in China valued at $120,000; 
property owned by his wife in China valued at $300,000, two bank accounts in China 
owned by his wife valued at $330,000, and his wife receives a $900 monthly pension from 
her former university employer in China. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.i) 
 
Applicant has a younger sister living in the United States as a permanent resident 
alien and is employed by a private Chinese company. His other younger sister lives in 
China and is employed by a private Chinese company. Not alleged, Applicant has a 
younger brother who is a resident citizen of Germany and is employed by a private 
Swaziland company. Applicant’s in-laws are both employed by a private university in 
China. Applicant communicates with his siblings in person, by telephone, and by e-mail, 
and communicates with his in-laws in person and by telephone. Applicant visited China 
at least two times in 2008, one time in 2009, one time in 2010, three times in 2011, one 
time in 2013, and one time in 2014.4 
 
As noted, Applicant updated or clarified several allegations, particularly as they 
pertain to real estate values of properties in China or cash value of assets. With regard 
to his and his wife’s real estate properties in China, he emphasized that it is “extreme[ly] 
difficult” to assess the value of Chinese real estate. That being the case, he could not 
know the true value of the properties at the time he completed his SF-86 nor could he 
know their true value at the present. (Item 2) Applicant also stated in his SOR answer that 
since he completed his SF-86, the value of his wife’s Chinese bank accounts had 
decreased from $330,000 to approximately $52,000. Additionally, the amount alleged in 
the SOR of $900 as his wife’s monthly pension from her former Chinese university 
employer alleged is incorrect. The correct amount is  approximately $1,240 a month. (Item 
2) 
 
 
  
 
                                            
4 Applicant reported these visits to China on his October 19, 2016 SF-86. Any visits after this date would 
not be included in this decision.  
 
4 
                                         
 
China 
 
 China has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party. It has a poor human rights record, suppresses political dissent and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
 China is the world’s most active and persistent perpetrator of economic espionage. 
It is among the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected U.S. 
technology, as well as military and economic intelligence. China targets the United States 
with active intelligence-gathering programs, both legal and illegal. Its focus is on obtaining 
U.S. information and technologies beneficial to China’s military modernization and 
economic development. China’s intelligence services, as well as private companies and 
other entities, frequently seek to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to 
China who can use their insider access to corporate networks to steal trade secrets using 
removable media devices or e-mail. There are several recent cases involving actual or 
attempted espionage, as well as the illegal export of sensitive military technology to 
China.  
 
In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone conversations, facsimile 
transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet communications. Authorities open 
and censor mail. Its security services have entered personal residences and offices to 
gain access to computers, telephones and fax machines. Hotel guest rooms are 
sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
 
5 
                                         
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
 
6 
                                         
 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
  
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(e) and 7(f) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.”5 
 
China has a significant history of conducting espionage against the United States 
to gain access to both industrial and military information. China’s tactics include seeking 
to exploit Chinese citizens or persons with family ties to China who can use their insider 
access to corporate networks to gain useful information. China has a poor human rights 
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
                                         
 
record. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest.  
 
Applicant’s sister and his wife’s parents are citizens and residents of China. He 
also has a sister and stepdaughter living in the United States that are Chinese citizens. 
Applicant has property in China valued at approximately $120,000; his wife has property 
in China valued at approximately $300,000 and bank accounts valued at approximately 
$52,000; and receives a monthly pension from her former Chinese university employer of 
$1,240. Applicant maintains frequent and regular contact with his immediate family 
members and his in-laws. Applicant’s wife is a citizen of China and a permanent U.S. 
resident and lives with Applicant. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e) and 7(f) have been raised by the 
evidence. 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
Applicant has regular contact with his family members and his in-laws, and has 
visited his family in China numerous times. He has daily contact with his wife, a Chinese 
citizen. Applicant’s contact with foreign relatives is not infrequent or casual. Therefore, I 
 
8 
                                         
 
cannot conclude that it is unlikely that his familial relationships could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s wife maintains two bank accounts in China valued at approximately 
$52,000. Applicant and his wife have property interests in China valued at $430,000. His 
wife receives a monthly pension of $1,240 from her former Chinese university employer. 
These financial interests are not insignificant. I cannot conclude that they are unlikely to 
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate or pressure 
the applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence concerns are increased because China aggressively and 
actively engages in espionage against the United States. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that the Applicant’s familial connections in China would make it unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between his family interests 
and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has significant ties to his family members and his wife’s parents. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude there is no conflict of interest, either because 
Applicant’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in favor 
of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government and its relationship with the United States is 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if a family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. There is 
insufficient evidence to make a determination regarding Applicant’s family’s association 
with the Chinese government or their vulnerability to government coercion. However, 
receiving a Chinese-based pension and owning real property and a bank account in China 
very likely involves government regulation of those interests. Although it is possible that 
Applicant’s parents, in-laws and his wife do not pose a security risk, I cannot make that 
determination without additional evidence. The record is void of sufficient information 
about Applicant or his family that would allow me to find that any of the mitigating 
conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
                                         
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant was born, raised and educated in China. He has a sister and in-laws who 
remain in China. Applicant has regular contact with them. Applicant and his wife maintain 
significant financial interests in China. His wife, sister, and stepdaughter remain Chinese 
citizens. He failed to provide sufficient information to meet his burden of persuasion to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                 
 
     
_____________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
