                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
 )     ISCR Case No.16-01847
 )
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )    
Appearances
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Leon Schachter, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On September 16, 2016, The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines were issued on
December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8, 2017.1
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on April 7, 2017. A notice of hearing, dated May 18, 2017, scheduled
the hearing for August 15, 2017. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were admitted into
In this case, the SOR was issued under Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Defense Department      1
on September 1, 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines became effective June 8, 2017. My decision and
formal findings under the revised Guideline F would not be different under the 2006 Guidelines.
1
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX A-X)
and presented one witness. The transcript was received on August 22, 2017. Based on
a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation at SOR ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.i. He also provided explanations with his responses.  
Applicant is a 33-year-old warehouse technician for a defense contractor. He is
married and has four children. He graduated from high school in 2003, and obtained an
associate’s degree in 2015. He served in the U.S. military on active duty from
November 2003 to October 2013, receiving an honorable discharge. He served in
combat tours abroad. He was injured and receives a disability pension from the VA. (AX
D) He has been with his current employer for two years. He completed his security
clearance application (SCA) in November 2015. He has previously held a security
clearance. (GX 1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges that Applicant has nine delinquent debts, which total
approximately $77,000. The delinquent debts include collection accounts, and charged-
off accounts.
Applicant’s answer provided  reasons for the delinquent accounts. He was single
when he served in the military and met his expenses. The 2015 credit report confirms
that his accounts were paid as agreed for all accounts prior to 2013. (GX 2) He married
in 2009, and his wife had two children. Applicant and his wife had two more children.
(Tr. 23) When Applicant left the military to transfer to the civilian work force, he could
not find steady full-time employment, in part due to his service connected disability. (Tr.
52) He was unemployed on various occasions in 2013, and almost all of 2014. He
found seasonal part-time work that paid poorly, but he took the job so he could support
his family. (Tr. 28) He incurred medical bills that he believed would be covered by the
military, but they were not. (Tr. 27) He went to school while he was unemployed to
better his job skills by using the GI bill benefits.  At one point, Applicant obtained a
consolidation loan with his credit union, but he could not keep up with the payments. 
(Tr. 58) He and his wife and children lived in a two-bedroom apartment because he
could not afford a larger apartment. (Tr. 30) He used credit cards while unemployed to
pay his bills and support his family. He did not find steady full-time employment until his
present job in 2015.
The SOR debts that are alleged were resolved in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in
November 2016. The debts were discharged in January 2017. (AX A-C) Applicant
received financial counseling as a part of the bankruptcy process. He also enrolled in
and completed nine FDIC financial courses in 2017. (AX F-O) It is to be noted that the
bankruptcy was a joint one. His wife had to stop working when she was pregnant with
2
their first child. She was on bed rest for six months. Some of the loans that belonged to
Applicant’s wife were included in the bankruptcy. (Tr. 72)
As to SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant paid this medical bill in the amount of $450 and
provided documentation. He also paid the account in SOR 1.c for $668. (AX V, O)
Applicant’s salary is $42,000 a year. He also received $1,800 a month for his
military disability. Applicant has paid his bankruptcy lawyer and his counsel for handling
this case. This amount was in the thousands. (Tr. 79) He does not have any new
delinquent debts. His wife is working and earning an income. He saves as much money
as he is able to. He uses a monthly budget. (AX U)
Applicant submitted four affidavits from colleagues who are aware of the security
concerns in the case. Each attests to his work ethic, character, willingness to protect
classified information, dedication and trustworthiness. He is recommended for a
security clearance based on his excellent work performance. (AX P-T, X)
At the hearing, Applicant’s witness testified that he has known Applicant for two
years and sees him daily at work. They have discussed the security concerns in the
case. The witness sees Applicant as a frugal family man who provides for his family. He
recommends him for a security clearance.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
3
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially over-extended is at a greater risk of having to
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including
espionage.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability to satisfy debts;
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The Government produced credible evidence to establish the delinquent debts
that were resolved in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to
raise disqualifying conditions. ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate the security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control;
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority to file
or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.
Applicant served on active duty  in combat zones. He was financially sound until
he married. His wife had two children and they now have four. When Applicant left his
military career due to an injury, he could not find steady full-time employment. He tried to
5
pay his bills. He used the GI bill to go to school to better his job skills. He lived in a small
apartment with his family. His lack of employment and his four children resulted in
delinquent debts. He tried a consolidation loan, but he could not meet the payments. On
legal advice, he and his wife filed for joint Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The debts were
discharged in January 2017.  He paid accounts that he could. His credit report shows a
majority of accounts pays as agreed from 2006 until about 2013. He has encountered
many challenges to provide for his children. However, he resolved his delinquent debts
through a legal means of bankruptcy and has a steady full-time job. His wife works also.
He has obtained financial counseling and obtained FDIC certificates.  AG ¶¶ 20 (a), (b),
(c), and (d) apply. He has  met his burden to alleviate the security concerns under the
financial considerations guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶2(d).
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 33 years old. He served in the U.S. military on active duty in combat
zones from 2003 to 2013 and received an honorable discharge. He was injured and
receives a disability pension. Until about 2011, he had no pressing financial issues.
When he left the service, he could not find employment. He spent about one year (2014)
unemployed and went to school to better his job skills. He married in 2009 and he and
his wife have four children. He provided for his family, but he incurred delinquent debt.
He tried a consolidation loan, but he could not meet the payments. He had medical bills
which he thought the VA would cover, but did not. He paid whatever bills he could. Upon
legal advice, he and his wife filed a joint Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His debts were
discharged in January 2017. He provided documentation to show he has rectified his
6
financial problems. He now has a steady full-time position. His wife also works. He
obtained financial counseling. He follows a budget. He has met his burden in this case.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude that he
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
7
