 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02044 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelly, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns raised by family members 
in Lebanon. His past behavior demonstrates he can resolve any potential conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. His allegiance to the United States was 
corroborated by his renunciation of his Lebanese citizenship, and by his dependability 
and performance while supporting U.S. forces even under enemy fire. U.S. military 
service members who served with him endorsed his eligibility for a clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 20, 2014. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on 
September 22, 2016, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 16, 2016, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
The case was assigned to me on December 30, 2016. The DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing that same day, setting the hearing for January 12, 2017. At the 
 
2 
 
 
hearing, the Government offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). The Government’s 
request for me to take administrative notice of facts concerning Lebanon (GE 6) was 
marked and made part of the record, but it is not evidence. Applicant testified and 
submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 6. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 Applicant was deployed overseas working for a federal contractor, and 
Department Counsel had difficulty communicating with him to schedule his hearing. 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing and returned to the United States for the 
hearing. At hearing, Applicant stated he had sufficient time to prepare, was ready to 
proceed, and affirmatively waived his right to 15-days of advanced notice of his hearing. 
(Tr. 13-15) 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
Lebanon. (GE 6) There were no objections, and I took administrative notice as 
requested. The noted facts are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions to the SOR 
and at his hearing are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of 
the record evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old linguist and translator. He has worked for a federal 
contractor, his current employer and clearance sponsor, at various times since 2008. 
(Tr. 78-80) Applicant married his wife in 2003 in the United States, and they divorced in 
2012. He has no children. 
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Beirut, Lebanon. He graduated from 
high school in Lebanon. He was drafted into the Lebanese army where he served as an 
enlisted soldier for a period of one year. He immigrated to the United States in May 
1999, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2009. He left Lebanon 
seeking opportunities to prosper and to better himself. Applicant renounced his 
Lebanese citizenship and surrendered his Lebanese passport before his naturalization 
as a U.S. citizen to avoid any confusion. (See the Lebanese Consulate General Letter in 
his Answer to the SOR.) Since immigrating to the United States, he has taken various 
college courses, but has not accumulated sufficient college courses to earn a degree. 
 
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and extended family members were born, raised, 
and educated in Lebanon. His father (81), mother (69), and brother (45) are Lebanese 
citizens residing permanently in the United States. His father retired as a lieutenant from 
the Lebanese Police Department in 1988, and has no current association with the 
Lebanese government. His mother has always been a homemaker. Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
sponsored his parents and one brother into the United States. They immigrated to the 
United States in 2011. He has weekly telephonic contact with his immediate relatives. 
They live legally in the United States, and while in the United States, they are not 
subject to possible coercion or harm. Applicant’s father has a pension and medical 
benefits from the Lebanese government, which he cannot receive while living in the 
United States. Applicant’s parents and brother travel yearly to and stay in Lebanon for 
extended periods (four months a year). His parents go back to collect his pension and 
receive medical benefits. His brother accompanies his parents and visits friends and 
relatives in Lebanon. His parents have not applied for U.S. citizenship because they 
have problems with the English language. 
 
Applicant second brother (44, works at a liquor store) and two sisters (ages 40 
and 38, both teachers), are citizens and residents of Lebanon. According to Applicant, 
they are working on requesting their green cards to immigrate to the United States. 
Since 1999, Applicant often sent money to his immediate relatives in Lebanon to help 
them with their basic living expenses, sometimes $1,000-$1,500 a month. He stopped 
sending money after his parents immigrated to the United States in 2011. Applicant 
testified he does not own any financial or property interests in any foreign country, 
including Lebanon.  
 
Since 2009, Applicant has faced the possibility of harm to him or his relatives in 
Lebanon because of his job for U.S. contractors in support of U.S. interests in Middle 
East countries. Applicant has maintained his loyalty and fiduciary obligations to the 
United States. He would like to continue to serve U.S. forces and contractors on other 
missions in the future.  
 
Applicant claimed he came under enemy fire while assisting U.S. military forces 
about six times. (Tr. 80-82) He presented 10 character statements, eight from U.S. 
service members who served with him while deployed in support of the U.S. military 
forces in Kuwait and Iraq. According to his references, Applicant demonstrated good 
skills and abilities as an interpreter and linguist. He proved to be a valuable asset to the 
U.S. forces in accomplishing their missions, and gained the trust and confidence of his 
then references. His references consider him to be dependable, reliable, and 
trustworthy. (AE 1, Answer to the SOR) They recommended Applicant for a position of 
trust. Additionally, Applicant submitted 13 certificates of appreciation from the different 
U.S. military units he worked for in Kuwait and Iraq, recognizing and praising his 
excellent performance, expertise, outstanding effort, and professionalism. Applicant’s 
reference statements demonstrate he has a track record of resolving potential conflicts 
of interest in favor of U.S. interests. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning Lebanon. The 
Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah, a terrorist organization, as a legitimate 
political party. Hizballah provides support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations 
and is known to be involved in numerous anti-U.S. and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks, in 
and around Lebanon. Other extremist groups designated as terrorist organizations 
operating in Lebanon include ISIL, ANF, Hamas, and the Abdullah Azzam Brigades. 
 
4 
 
 
Lebanon has human rights problems, including the arbitrary arrest and detainment of 
individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, torture, and other 
abuses. Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon. The 
U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens to avoid traveling to Lebanon because of the 
threats of terrorism, armed clashes, violence, and kidnappings. (GE 6) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017, which 
replaced the 2006 AG. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, § 2. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch 
in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
 
5 
 
 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The foreign influence security concern is explained at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.1 
 
I Individuals are not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have connections and contacts in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing 
an individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, an administrative judge must 
take into account the foreign government involved; the intelligence-gathering history of 
that government; the country’s human rights record; and other pertinent factors.2  
 
 The serious security threat posed by terrorist organizations and other elements 
hostile to the United States must be taken into account in assessing the security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections in Lebanon. Applicant’s relationship 
to these foreign relatives, coupled with the facts administratively noticed, raise a 
heightened security concern.  
 
 In assessing the security concern raised by Applicant’s foreign contacts, I have 
considered the following disqualifying and mitigating conditions:   
 
                                            
1 ISCR Case No. 09-07565 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2012) (“As the Supreme Court stated in Egan, 
a clearance adjudication may be based not only upon conduct but also upon circumstances unrelated to 
conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant’s close relatives.”) (internal citation omitted).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors an administrative 
judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology;  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 An individual with family members and other connections in a foreign country 
faces a high, but not insurmountable, hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by 
such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a foreign country 
before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”3 However, what 
factor or combination of factors will mitigate security concerns raised by an applicant 
with family members in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.4  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1999, started working for federal 
contractors in 2008, and became a U.S. citizen in 2009. He sponsored his parents and 
one brother to immigrate to the United States in 2011. They live legally in the United 
States, and while in the United States, they are not subject to possible coercion or 
harm. Applicant’s parents and brother travel yearly to and stay in Lebanon for extended 
periods (four months a year). His parents go back to collect his pension and receive 
medical benefits, his brother travels with his parents and visits with friends and relatives 
in Lebanon. His parents have not applied for U.S. citizenship because they have 
problems with the English language. Applicant has three siblings living in Lebanon, all of 
whom are working on immigrating to the United States. 
 
                                            
3 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 23, 2014). 
 
7 
 
 
Since 2009, Applicant has faced the possibility of harm to him or his relatives in 
Lebanon because of his job for U.S. contractors in support of U.S. interests in Middle 
East countries. Applicant has maintained his loyalty and fiduciary obligations to the 
United States. He would like to continue to serve U.S. forces and contractors on other 
missions in the future. Applicant’s reference statements, demonstrate he has a track 
record of resolving potential conflicts of interest raised during his job in favor of U.S. 
interests.  
 
Applicant’s statements of allegiance to the United States, to report any attempted 
coercion or threats, and to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States, are supported by his 10-year track record of working for and supporting U.S. 
interests in the Middle East. His allegiance to the United States was corroborated by his 
renunciation of his Lebanese citizenship and surrendering his Lebanese passport. His 
dependability and performance while working for U.S. forces and coming under enemy 
fire six times, speak favorably of his allegiance and commitment to the United States. 
U.S. military service members who served with him in Kuwait and Iraq endorse his 
eligibility for a clearance.5 (I noted the reference statements did not comment on 
whether Applicant came under fire while working with them.) Additionally, Applicant has 
developed deep and long-lasting bonds in the United States, as evidenced by the 
reference letters. 
 
Accordingly, after a complete and thorough review of the record evidence, and 
while remaining mindful of my duty to resolve any unmitigated doubt in favor of 
protecting national security, I find that Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised 
by his connections to and contact with his family in Lebanon.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
                                            
5 ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (“Generally, an Applicant’s statements, 
by themselves, as to what he would do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled 
to little weight. On the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the U.S. is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case. In this case, Applicant 
has served the U.S. military as a translator in dangerous circumstances in Afghanistan and has risked his 
life to protect American personnel there.) See also ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 
2006) (“As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior history of complying with 
security procedures and regulations significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct or 
circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in Guideline B 
cases, where the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with 
security procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in 
which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national security. The presence of such 
circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.”) (internal citations omitted).  
 
8 
 
 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
U.S. forces in the Middle East at various times since 2008. He established a reputation 
for his linguistic abilities. Moreover, Applicant is considered to be a trusted employee, 
who is reliable, dependable, and a loyal American. He accompanied U.S. forces on 
numerous military missions where he risked his life and came under enemy fire six 
times. His references, U.S. military service members who served with him in Kuwait and 
Iraq, endorsed his eligibility for a clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
