 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                                      
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------------------- ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 16-01060 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: 
Pro se  
 
September 8, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 6, 2015. (Government Exhibit 1.) On July 1, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.1 
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 1, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on September 6, 2016. The case was assigned to me on September 16, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
November 22, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 26, 2017.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits A through C, which were admitted 
without objection, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the final transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on February 3, 2017. Applicant requested that the record remain open 
until February 28, 2017, for the receipt of additional exhibits. He timely submitted 
Applicant Exhibits D through J, which were all admitted without objection and the record 
closed as scheduled.  
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old, married to his second wife, and has three children. He is 
seeking to obtain national security eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he has a past-due debt, has an unpaid tax lien with State A, and filed a Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in 2011. Therefore he is potentially unreliable, untrustworthy, or at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all three allegations with explanations. He also 
submitted additional evidence to support his request for a finding of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant was married to his first wife from 1996 until 2010. They lived in State A 
that entire time. Applicant’s wife was abusive, and a drug and alcohol abuser with a 
criminal record. Applicant received sole custody of his two children from his first wife 
during the divorce. He also was able to obtain an order of protection from the court to 
have her stay away from the children, and permission to move to State B. Applicant’s wife 
has paid very little in child support, and has had very limited visitation with the children 
since the divorce. (Applicant Exhibits I, J; Tr. 20-22, 41-43.) 
 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006; as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant moved to State B for work in 2012. He continues to live in State B. 
Applicant’s ex-wife has never lived in State B, yet she fraudulently uses Applicant’s 
address in State B in order to avoid bill collectors. Applicant provided documentary proof 
of this fact. This has caused Applicant problems. (Applicant Exhibits C, J; Tr. 31-33.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he owed a past-due credit card debt in the amount of 
$546. This debt has been paid and resolved. (Applicant Exhibit E; Tr. 25-29, 47-50.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that a tax lien had been entered against him in 2013 by 
State A in the amount of $7,114. Applicant’s ex-wife was an accountant, and handled all 
of the tax issues for the two of them. She did not do a good job. Applicant testified that he 
did not know about the tax lien until he was interviewed by an investigator from the Office 
of Personnel Management in January 2016. That same month he hired a reputable tax 
resolution firm to represent him and resolve his issues with the taxing authorities. He 
submitted a letter from the enrolled agent with the IRS who is working with him. Her letter, 
dated February 2, 2017, states that her company has been working to “resolve his 
problems with taxes dated back to 2006. We are wrapping up his [State A] taxes and he 
will not have a balance due to [State A]. We are on the last phase of removing any liens 
from the [State A] Department of Revenue, in essence clearing his credit report from 
liens.” He recognizes his personal responsibility to make sure his taxes are filed in a timely 
fashion in the future. This tax lien is being resolved. (Applicant Exhibit H; Tr. 29-38.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2011. 
At that time he was in financial difficulty because of his ex-wife’s financial chicanery, and 
the down-turn in the economy, which affected his income severely. He had an adjusted 
gross income of $207 in 2008; -$1,136 in 2009; and $3,086 in 2010. In 2011 he was 
collecting welfare, as shown in Schedule I of his bankruptcy petition. He received a 
discharge from his debts on May 31, 2011. (Government Exhibit 3; Tr. 22-23, 38-40.) 
  
 Applicant’s current financial situation is stable. He makes a substantial income, is 
able to maintain his household without problems, and the most recent credit reports in the 
record show no new delinquent accounts. (Government Exhibits 5, and 6; Tr. 43-45.)  
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant provided three letters of recommendation from people who know him in 
the defense industry in State B. The CEO of Applicant’s current employer describes 
Appellant’s work as “exemplary,” and says, “[Applicant] has been one of our most 
trustworthy and dedicated employees we have had.” (Applicant Exhibit A.) A civilian 
government employee who has worked with Appellant for three years describes Appellant 
as a person of “insight and professionalism.” (Applicant Exhibit D.) A senior project 
manager for Applicant’s employer states, “His [Applicant’s] performance on all projects 
was excellent and his work product was of the highest quality.” (Applicant Exhibit G.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a national security eligibility and a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be 
used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant had one past-due debt, a tax lien, and filed for bankruptcy protection in 
2011. All three of these conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate them. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant paid the single past-due debt alleged in the SOR. He has hired a 
reputable firm to represent him before the tax authorities, and submitted evidence that 
they have been working to resolve his tax issues since shortly after he was informed of 
them. He presented compelling evidence that his financial situation in 2011 was primarily 
because of his bitter and contentious divorce, and the severe economic downturn. His 
income virtually disappeared for several years while he had to take care of his children 
by himself. He appropriately used bankruptcy to resolve his past-due debts. His current 
financial status is stable, and he evinces a credible intent and ability of being able to 
maintain that stability into the future. He has fully mitigated all the allegations in the SOR. 
Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns regarding his financial situation. Overall, the record evidence does not create 
substantial doubt as to Applicant=s present suitability for national security eligibility, and a 
security clearance. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by & E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant=s national security 
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                  
 
 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
