                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
)
 )     ISCR Case No.16-02049
 )
` )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )     
Appearances
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq. Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On August 8, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline B
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. Revised Adjudicative Guidelines were issued on
December 10, 2016, and became effective on June 8, 2017.
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on July 20, 2017. A notice of hearing was issued on August 14, 2017,
2017, scheduling the hearing for August 24, 2017.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-2 were1
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Applicant signed a waiver of notice.      1
1
Exhibits (AX) A-D, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open and
Applicant submitted additional documents, which were marked and admitted into the
record as (AX) E-L. The transcript was received on September 1, 2017. Based on a
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Procedural Issues
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts
about Iraq. The request and supporting documentation are in the record as Hearing
Exhibit I. Applicant did not object to the request. I took administrative notice as
requested by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline B.
He also provided explanations about the allegations.  (Answer to SOR)
Applicant is a 32-year-old linguist working for a defense contractor for the United
States military in Iraq. He was born in Iraq and came to the United States in 2008 via
the green-card lottery. He is single and has no children. He became a naturalized
citizen in 2014. Applicant  obtained his undergraduate degree from an American
university in 2013. He was a student in Iraq before coming to the United States and
earned an associate’s degree. He has worked for his current employer since
September 2016. Before his current position, he worked as a medical interpreter for a
private company. (Tr. 21) Applicant completed his security clearance application on
February 28, 2015. (GX 1)
Applicant lives on a military base and travels with a unit throughout Iraq so that
he can interpret the language and assist with cultural matters. He provides the ability for
the U.S. military to smoothly communicate with the Iraqi people and Iraqi authorities. He
also helps with contacts with the Kurdish authorities so that they can complete their
mission. (Tr. 23) He does not have contact with his family when working in Iraq on a
mission.
Foreign Influence
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s thirteen brothers, ten sisters, his mother, father
and his father’s two wives are citizens and residents of Iraq. The SOR also alleges that
Applicant has extended family members who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Finally,
the SOR alleges that Applicant’s father, three brothers and one sister are employed
with the Kurdistan regional government office in Iraq. (SOR ¶¶1.a-1.d)
Applicant acknowledges his relatives in Iraq, but denies that they create a risk of
foreign influence because none of his relatives are affiliated with the official Iraqi
government. (GX 2) His relatives live in Northern Iraq, which is pro-U.S./western and is
a safer area of Iraq.
2
Applicant has many siblings, but some of them are half-siblings. He does not
keep in touch with most of them. Some of his half-siblings are under the age of 18, and
he does not know them well.  When he would call his father, if one of them was around,
he would say hello. (Tr. 31)
Applicant initially submitted documentation that he has applied for four brothers
to be entered into the 2018 Diversity Lottery Program for entrance into the United
States. (AX A-D) As post-hearing submissions, he submitted additional information that
he has submitted others in his family. (AX E-L) Applicant explained that if one of his
siblings win the lottery and receives a visa, then that person can write in the name of
the others in the family for a chance with the lottery. (Tr. 32) 
Applicant’s mother in Iraq is ill and is semi-paralyzed. He keeps in touch with her
once every two to three months. (Tr. 26) Applicant sometimes sends her money for her
physical therapy. (Tr. 29) He traveled to Iraq in 2014 to see his mother. He calls his
father, who works for the Kurdistan ministry for religious affairs. (Tr. 26) When he calls
his father, he asks about his father’s two wives, who are housewives.  He explained that
his father is a “simple employee” and does not have any contact with high level officials.
(Tr. 27) Applicant’s father has visited him in the United States. Applicant believes it was
in 2012. 
Applicant has three brothers who work for the Kurdistan Regional Government in
Iraq. His one sister works for the Ministry of Education as a teacher. This is part of the
Kurdistan Regional Government. (Tr. 34) Applicant has an uncle who is a citizen and
resident of Iraq. He does not maintain direct contact with him, but if he talks to his
father, he will ask about him. (Tr. 36)
When asked about his relatives in Iraq and possible Iraqi contacts, which might 
affect them, Applicant noted that his family is in the north and is Kurdish. He truly
believes that this area, since it is pro-Western, is a much safer place for his family. (Tr.
44) His family does not know that he is under consideration for a security clearance.
Applicant has applied for each member of his immediate family who is eligible to
enter the Lottery Program. The criteria is age (18) and in possession of an associate’s
degree. Some of his half-siblings are still in lower school. (Tr. 45)
Applicant has a cousin who lives in the United States, who came to the United
States through the Lottery Program. The cousin brought his wife and children  with him.
(Tr. 39) Applicant has a girlfriend who is a U.S. citizen. He has known her since 2011.
(Tr. 41)
Applicant left Iraq because he sees no future for him in that country. He wants to
stay in the United States, and he wants to bring as many of his family members to the
United States as he can. His plan is to submit another family member for the lottery
each year (Tr. 48 ) He sees no future in Iraq and the country is not stable.
3
Applicant has no financial interest or property in Iraq. He has not provided
financial support to any foreign national. He has had no foreign government contact. 
He also stated that he had no relatives associated with any political organization. (GX
2)
Applicant stated that he has provided money to his mother since 2016. He
believes he has sent about $24,000. The economic situation is very bad and there is no
salary from the government. (Tr.29) Applicant’s annual salary is now about $95,000. He
also receives per diem when he is traveling with his unit. He has a bank and savings
account in the United States.
Applicant submitted a letter of reference from a U.S. military officer, who is the
unit team leader. The officer highly recommends Applicant because he is an incredible
resource. He speaks both Arabic and Kurdish, which is necessary on missions in Arab
controlled areas. His understanding of the culture allows the unit to navigate a complex
and diverse sociological landscape. Applicant has served “on the road” for as many as
15 hours and has remained focused. He can provide important background information
for each district. The unit team leader trusts Applicant and states that he has been the
most valuable member of his team. Applicant has served on the front lines and has
been threatened. (AX E)
Administrative Notice
DOHA administrative judges may accept for administrative notice
uncontroverted, easily verifiable facts regarding a foreign country derived from official
U.S. Government reports, the official position of appropriate federal agencies, or the
pertinent statement(s) of key U.S. Government officials. The source document(s) or, at
a minimum, the relevant portion(s) of the source document should be included in the
record for potential appellate review regarding the accuracy and relevancy of the fact(s)
administratively noticed. See generally, ISCR case No. 08-09480 (App. Bd. Mar. 17,
2010); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007).
Iraq faces many challenges. Those challenges include overcoming three
decades of war and government mismanagement that stunted Iraq’s economy;
sectarian and ethnic tensions that have slowed progress toward national reconciliation;
and ongoing criminal and terrorist violence. Since 2013, there has been a marked
increase in insurgent attacks and civilian casualties. Conditions throughout the country
remain dangerous. 
In 2015, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remained the greatest
terrorist threat globally, maintaining a formidable force in Iraq and Syria, including a
large number of foreign terrorist fighters. Although ISIL did not claim responsibility, it
was likely responsible for several attacks involving chemical-filled munitions in Iraq.
While ISIL’s capacity and territorial control in Iraq reached a high point in spring 2015,
some erosion occurred over the second half of 2015. Despite Iraqi gains, there
remained a security vacuum in parts of Iraq.
4
The Kurdish region in Iraq is fairly autonomous. The region lies in the northeast
of Iraq. They have their own government and school system. The Kurds are a strong
ally in the region. Since 1991, the United States has played a role in protecting Iraq’s
Kurdish autonomy ---- while insisting that Iraq’s territorial integrity not be compromised
by an Iraqi Kurdish move toward independence. At times this region has been marked
as the “other Iraq.” This is a relatively safe and economically sound slice of the country
which welcomes westerners with open arms. 
The U.S. Embassy warns that U.S. citizens are at high risk for kidnapping and
violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The U.S. government considers the
potential threat to U.S. government personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require
them to live and work under strict security guidelines. 
In 2015, observers reported many significant human-rights-related problems
such as torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Terrorist suicide bombings are a continuing threat in Iraq, and U.S. citizens are advised
to be cautious.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(d)
national security eligibility requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being
considered will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded
on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
5
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business,
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way inconsistent with U.S. interests, or otherwise made vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
6
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. A disqualifying
condition may be raised by “contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). In addition, AG
¶ 7(b) is relevant as it provides that “connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information or
technology.”
Applicant’s immediate family are citizens and residents of Iraq in the Kurdish
region. Some of them work for the Kurdish Regional Government. Applicant maintains
contact with them. Iraq is ostensibly an ally and receives a great deal of military,
economic, and political support from the United States. However, Iraq is increasingly
unstable, violent, and beset by terrorist activity since the departure of most of the
American presence from there. There is no doubt that ISIL falls within the security
concerns associated with international terrorism. The presence of Applicant’s immediate
family and uncle in Iraq establishes AG ¶ 7(a).
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States
has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United
States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29,
2002). Finally, friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006)
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
7
The Government submitted country summaries of Iraq in its request for
Administrative Notice. Record evidence places a burden of persuasion on Applicant to
demonstrate that his relationship with his family members living in Iraq does not pose a
security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his family living in
Iraq.  
I conclude that Applicant’s ties are sufficient to raise an issue of a heightened risk
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. This relationship
with his relatives in Iraq creates a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help his relatives in Iraq. 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8 (a) 
The mere possession of close ties with a family member in Iraq is not, as a matter
of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship
with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create
the potential for foreign influence and could possibly result in the compromise of
classified information. See generally  ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15,
2006); ISCR Case NO. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).
Security concerns under this guideline can also be mitigated by showing “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, or allegiance to the group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United
States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), and 8(b) are applicable. Applicant’s family lives in the Kurdish region
of Iraq. They do not know that Applicant is applying for a security clearance. The
circumstances of Applicant’s family are such that they are not likely to be targeted as a
means of coercing Applicant. They are not aware that he might work in a classified
environment. He has contact with his mother and father out of respect as a son. He has
some contact with his siblings. Despite the heightened risk, the common defense of their
home by the Kurdish military further lessens the vulnerability of Applicant’s family to
coercion by terrorist entities. This supports mitigation under A G ¶ 8 (a).  
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(b) applies based on Applicant’s work as a
linguist and cultural advisor for the U.S. military in Iraq. He presented a highly favorable
letter of reference from a leader of the unit. He is highly recommended for his knowledge
and language skills in Kurdish. He left Iraq without his family as he saw no future for him
there. He has a girlfriend in the United States. He does not want to leave the United
8
States. He is sending in the names of his relatives who are eligible for the Lottery
Program each year. Applicant is a naturalized citizen. He worked hard and obtained an
undergraduate degree in the United States before obtaining his present position. He has
a cousin who lives in the United States. He is committed to his personal and
professional life as a U.S. citizen.
Applicant expressed his loyalty to the United States. He is a naturalized citizen
who has lived and worked in the U.S. since 2008.  I have also considered the ongoing
situation in Iraq with extensive terrorist activities, and human rights issues.  
Applicant has strong ties to the United States. He left Iraq to pursue his academic
career in the United States. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen and has been in the United
States since 2008.  He has no financial interests in Iraq. He has firm ties to the United
States and considers it his home. He can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of
interest in favor of the United States. He has established application of AG 8 (b).
Applicant has mitigated the concerns under the foreign influence guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d)
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is an educated man who is a naturalized U.S.
citizen. He left his country without his family so that he could continue his education in
the United States and live in a country where he could utilize his language skills. He is
trying to bring his family to the United States through the Lottery Program. He is working
in Iraq with the U.S. military on the front lines.  He has a letter of recommendation from
9
his unit in Iraq. He has great language and cultural skills. Applicant can be relied on to
act at all times in the best interests of the United States. He has a girlfriend in the United
States and a cousin and family in the United States. He has no financial interests in Iraq.
Applicant’s relatives are Kurds. They do not know that Applicant is applying for a
security clearance. Applicant does maintain contact with his mother and father and some
siblings. However, his primary duty is to his own life in the United States. For all these
reasons, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and
evaluating all the record evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).
Accordingly, I conclude that he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified
information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
10
