 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 16-01848 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by her 
overdue tax returns. After her brother died while serving in the U.S. military, Applicant 
became overwhelmed dealing with her grief and handling numerous other issues. She 
received counseling and started addressing her overdue tax returns three years ago. All 
overdue tax returns have been filed and any taxes owed have been paid. Applicant has 
filed her tax returns over the past two years on time. Her financial situation is under 
control, and it is unlikely that similar financial issues will recur. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On September 14, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, the hearing was 
held. Applicant testified and the exhibits offered by the parties were admitted into the 
 
2 
 
administrative record without objection.1 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on 
September 22, 2017, and the record closed on September 27, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 49, has been working as a cleared federal contractor for over 10 years. 
She submitted a security clearance application in connection with a periodic 
reinvestigation in 2015. She reported failing to timely file her federal and state tax returns 
for tax years 2012 through 2014. (Exhibit 1)  
 
Between June 2014 and October 2016, Applicant filed her overdue tax returns. 
She received refunds for tax years 2012 and 2014, and paid the taxes she owed for 2013. 
She was counseled by her supervisor regarding her late tax filings, and has filed her tax 
returns for the past two years on time. She received federal and state tax refunds totaling 
over $6,500 for tax years 2015 and 2016. She submitted a recent bank statement, 
showing that her 2016 tax refunds were received well before the April 15th deadline. She 
credibly testified that she will continue to file her tax returns on time. (Exhibits B – G) 
 
Applicant filed her tax returns late because she became overwhelmed trying to 
handle a number of personal issues that all occurred at about same time. Of note, 
Applicant’s tax issues began shortly after her brother died while serving overseas in the 
U.S. military. While trying to deal with her grief, her mother became seriously ill, and a 
longtime relationship ended abruptly. Further complicating Applicant’s situation was the 
receipt of statements from her financial institution, erroneously showing that she had 
taken an early withdrawal from her retirement account. Another financial institution failed 
to timely provide needed tax documents, and her movers lost other documents that she 
needed to complete her returns. Applicant filed for the necessary extensions for each of 
the tax years in question. But, when the time came to file the returns, she missed the 
deadlines. As of the close of the record, Applicant had filed all overdue tax returns and 
paid any taxes due.  
 
In 2015, Applicant purchased a new home and, for the past two years, she has 
made the monthly mortgage payments on a consistent and timely basis. She has earned 
between $108,000 and $135,000 over the past five years. (Exhibits A – E, G) A recent 
checking account statement reflects that, after paying recurring expenses and debts, 
Applicant regularly carries a monthly balance of approximately $1,500. (Exhibit F) A 
recent credit report reflects that she is “paying as agreed” all current consumer accounts. 
(Exhibit 2)  
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
                                                          
1 Government Exhibits 1 and 2; Applicant’s Exhibits A – G. The discovery letter, correspondence with the 
parties, the notice of hearing, and case management order were marked Appellate Exhibits I – IV. 
 
3 
 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). See ISCR Case No. 02-00305 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current 
DoD policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and conduct all hearings in 
a timely and orderly manner. Judges must carefully balance the needs for the expedient 
resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, an administrative judge 
will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, (b) has a reasonable 
opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair surprise. Directive, 
¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.2 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court has held that 
responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
                                                          
2 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 12-11375 (App. Bd. June 17, 2016). 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.3 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions listed under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax as required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior . . . occurred under such circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source . . . and there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
                                                          
3 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
 In a Guideline F case, an administrative judge examines the way an applicant 
handles his or her personal financial obligations to attempt to discern how they may 
handle their security obligations. Here, Applicant’s security clearance eligibility was called 
into question because she did not timely file her tax returns for three successive years. 
An applicant’s failure to timely file his or her income tax returns and/or pay taxes raises 
heightened security concerns about the person’s judgment and ability to abide by rules 
and regulations. This, in turn, requires a judge to closely scrutinize the circumstances 
giving rise to tax-related financial issues and the person’s response to it.4 
 
A number of matters largely beyond Applicant’s control struck her at roughly the 
same time and contributed to her failure to timely file her tax returns. She was not trying 
to evade or dodge her obligation to pay taxes.  
 
Starting about three years ago, Applicant took action to address her tax situation. 
She submitted all overdue tax returns, paid all outstanding taxes, and for the past two 
years has filed her tax returns on time. Beyond resolving her overdue tax filings, the 
record reflects that Applicant handles her personal finances in a responsible manner. 
 
Additionally, Applicant demonstrated that she can continue to be trusted to self-
report potentially adverse information, as evidenced by the disclosures she made on her 
security clearance application. Her honesty and candor continued throughout the security 
clearance process and at hearing.5  
 
Applicant demonstrated that she responsibly addressed her past financial issues. 
Her current financial situation is under control and, going forward, she can once again be 
trusted to responsibly handle her financial obligations in the manner expected of all 
clearance holders.6 AG 20(a) – 20(d), and 20(g) apply. In short, Applicant met her burden 
of proof and persuasion in mitigating the security concerns at issue.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
4 See generally, ISCR Case No. 14-03358 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2015) (Board explained the heightened 
security concerns raised by tax-related financial issues:  “A security clearance represents an obligation to 
the Federal Government for the protection of national secrets. Accordingly failure to honor other obligations 
to the Government has a direct bearing on an applicant’s . . . ability to protect classified information.”). 
 
5 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person factors); SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (other relevant factors). 
 
6 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 15-03481 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2016) (filing of overdue tax returns alone 
insufficient to mitigate heightened security concerns, because no evidence of financial reform or 
extenuating circumstances to explain the late filing). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
