 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02285 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 23, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 26, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 
13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2017. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
The Government’s exhibit list was appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection. After the hearing, the record was held open at 
Applicant’s request to submit additional documentation. He submitted AE I, which was 
admitted without objection. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Russia. The request was not admitted in evidence but was appended to the record 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a government contractor, employed since 
April 2014. He has held a DOD security clearance since 2002. He is a high school 
graduate, and has been working toward a bachelor’s degree. He enlisted in the United 
States Army in 2002 and was honorably discharged in 2010. He twice served in Iraq and 
was awarded an army commendation medal and three army achievement medals during 
his enlistment. He worked for other government contractors from 2010 to 2014, including 
in Afghanistan. His family has a long history of military service in combat for the United 
States. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Russia, residing in the U.S.; 
her parents are citizens and residents of Russia; that Applicant resided in Russia for 
approximately 9 months for the birth of his child; and that he maintains contact with a 
Russian citizen with whom he lived while in Russia, who now resides in the United States. 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, but provided explanations and clarifications in 
his answer.  
 
Applicant met his spouse, a Russian citizen, during a leisure trip to Russia in 2011. 
They met in a metro station, and she spoke English. They dated, corresponded by e-mail, 
and met in various U.S. and overseas locations between 2011 and 2014. He was 
introduced to her parents in 2013. Applicant resided in Moscow for five months from late 
May to October 2014, after he completed a civilian assignment to Afghanistan, while his 
fiancé was pregnant. They lived at her friend’s apartment (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e) until his 
fiancé gave birth to their child in September 2014. She did so in Russia because she 
wanted her parent’s support while she was pregnant. The child is a dual U.S. and Russian 
citizen. They returned to the U.S. on a K-1 “fiancé” visa, and married in November 2014. 
Applicant’s spouse now has substantial ties to the United States, and no longer has 
significant ties to Russia, except for her elderly parents. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s spouse is a medical doctor. She previously worked in a clinic in Russia. 
While in the U.S., she passed the medical licensing exam, which permits her to practice 
in the United States. She was issued a green card and then U.S. permanent residency in 
June 2015. She expects to be granted U.S. citizenship before the card expires. She is 
currently employed as a research physician at a university. Her father is a 70-year-old 
retired neurologist, who worked for a British company in Russia. (SOR ¶ 1.d) Her mother 
is a homemaker. (SOR ¶ 1.c) They do not speak English and Applicant does not speak 
Russian, so they have very limited communications. Applicant’s spouse corresponds with 
them via skype about two times per month, but she has not returned to Moscow since 
leaving in 2014. Her mother has visited the U.S. in 2015 and 2016 to see her grandchild. 
 
The friend that Applicant and his fiancé lived with in Moscow is a Russian citizen, 
now residing in the U.S. as a U.S. resident, is employed as a financial analyst for a U.S. 
company, and is engaged to marry a U.S. citizen. She will presumably be seeking U.S. 
citizenship after her marriage. Applicant’s spouse maintains irregular contact with her.  
 
Applicant has a Russian bank account, opened in 2013, with a balance of 
approximately $2,000. The account was to assist his fiancé while she was pregnant and 
is available for use in case they visit Russia. He tried to close the account, but must do 
so in person. Applicant owns four residential properties in the U.S. that generate about 
$3,400 per month in income. He has paid-off the mortgage on two of the properties. He 
has about $130,000 in cash and investments. His estimated net worth is approximately 
$500,000. Applicant complied with reporting requirements during all of his overseas trips 
and filed contact reports each time he visited his spouse. He maintained strict compliance 
with security regulations and kept his management and security office informed. He 
testified that he takes security very seriously and has been entrusted before with sensitive 
and classified equipment and assignments while on active duty and while employed as a 
civilian. 
 
Russia 
 
 Russia continues to be one of the leading state intelligence threats to U.S. 
interests. Russian intelligence services continue to target U.S. and allied personnel with 
access to sensitive computer network information. Russia remains one of the top two 
most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and 
technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include 
targeting of U.S. visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having 
access to sensitive information. One of the two trends that may increase Russia’s threat 
over the next several years is that many Russian immigrants with advanced technical 
skills, who work for leading U.S. companies, may be increasingly targeted for recruitment 
by Russian intelligence services.  
 
 Russia’s extensive and sophisticated intelligence operations are motivated by 
Russia’s high dependence on natural resources, the need to diversity its economy, and 
the belief that the global economic system is tilted toward the United States at Russia’s 
expense. As a result, Russia’s highly capable intelligence services are using HUMINT, 
cyber, and other operations to collect economic information and technology to support 
 
4 
 
Russia’s economic development and security. In June 2010, the U.S. Department of 
Justice announced the arrests of ten alleged secret agents for carrying out long-term, 
“deep-cover” assignments on behalf of Russia. Within weeks, all ten defendants pled 
guilty in federal court, and were immediately expelled from the United States.  
 
 Russia continues to take information warfare to a new level, working to fan anti-
U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and globally. Moscow will continue 
to publish false and misleading information in an effort to discredit the West, construe or 
distort events that threaten Russia’s image, undercut consensus on Russia, and defend 
Russia’s role as a responsible and indispensable global power. 
 
 The most significant human rights problems of 2015 in Russia involved the 
following: restrictions on the ability to choose one’s government and freedoms of 
expression, assembly, association, and the media, as well as internet freedoms; political 
prosecutions and administration of justice; and government discrimination against racial, 
ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. Other problems include allegations of torture and 
excessive force by law enforcement officials that sometimes led to deaths, executive 
branch pressure on the judiciary, electoral irregularities, and extensive official corruption. 
The government failed to take adequate steps to prosecute or punish most officials who 
committed abuses, resulting in a climate of impunity. 
 
 Although Russian law prohibits officials from entering a private residence, except 
in cases prescribed by federal law or when authorized by a judicial decision, government 
officials entered residences and premises without warrants. In addition, while Russian law 
prohibits government monitoring of correspondence, telephone conversations, and other 
means of communication without a warrant, government officials engaged in electronic 
surveillance without appropriate authorization. 
 
 The U.S. reaffirmed its commitment to a united, sovereign Ukraine, and is deeply 
concerned by the situation in Russian-occupied Crimea, where occupation “authorities” 
suppress dissent and where ethnic and religious minorities, especially Crimean Tatars 
and ethnic Ukrainians, face serious and ongoing repression. The U.S. does not accept 
the redrawing of borders by force and sanctions related to Crimea will remain in place as 
long as the occupation continues. 
 
 Russia is considered to be at a high risk of local, regional, and international 
terrorism threats and concerns. In September 2015, Russia initiated military operations 
in Syria. In response, the Islamic Group of Iraq and the Levant and affiliated terrorist 
organizations have issued threats vowing retaliatory terrorist attacks in Russia. The 
Russian Federal Security Service reported no terrorist attacks in the Russian Federation 
in 2015, however in October 2015, a Russian charter plane exploded in mid-air over Egypt 
due to an improvised explosive device on board. All 224 people on board, including 219 
Russian nationals, were killed. Russian authorities, in addition to the United States and 
the United Kingdom, determined the incident was an act of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. My ultimate 
decision would be the same under either set of adjudicative guidelines. 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority 
to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. 
The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
6 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 has four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual's 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
 
7 
 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant is married to a Russian citizen who has parents living in Russia. He also 
has a modest bank account in Russia, and his spouse maintains periodic contact with her 
parents and a friend who is a Russian citizen, living and working in the U.S. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with one or more family members living 
in Russia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B; however, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03- 
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation 
to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human-rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the 
government is engaged in a counterinsurgency, terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The relationship of Russia with the United States, 
places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Russia do not pose 
a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced 
to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member 
living in Russia. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his spouse, relatives and a friend who are foreign 
citizens or living in Russia create a potential conflict of interest because the Russian 
government could place pressure on his family living in Russia in an effort to cause 
Applicant to compromise classified information. These relationships create “a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” under AG 
 
8 
 
¶ 7. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with 
family and a friend who are citizens of Russia and has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry 
is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions. I find AG ¶ 7(f) does 
not apply as Applicant’s bank account in Russia is not substantial, and he intends to close 
it but requires physical access to do so. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8 (a), (b), (e), and (f) apply. Applicant has infrequent contact with his in-
laws, but his spouse has contact about twice a month. Applicant has “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” including honorable service in the 
U.S. military and contract work for the U.S. government. His patriotism is unquestioned. 
His spouse is a U.S. permanent resident striving to gain her U.S. citizenship, and is a 
working doctor. They have a young child that is a U.S. citizen, living in the U.S.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Applicant’s spouse’s ties to Russia are limited to her parents, and tangentially to 
her friend, who is a Russian citizen despite her residence in the U.S. Her father is a 70 
year old retired doctor from a UK corporation. Her mother is a homemaker. I believe there 
is little likelihood that contact with his spouse’s parents or friend creates a reasonable 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation, despite the heightened risk associated with 
Russia. Her father and mother do not have known ties to the Russian government and 
there is a language barrier between Applicant and his in-laws. Her friend, a Russian 
citizen, is also a resident of the U.S., working in the U.S., and engaged to a U.S. citizen. 
Presumably, she will be seeking U.S. citizenship once married. Applicant and his 
spouse’s contact with her are infrequent. 
 
Applicant and his spouse own substantial assets in the U.S., and their Russian 
bank account is minimal in comparison. He intends to close the account, but must do so 
in-person. Applicant reported all of his trips and contacts with his spouse while traveling 
overseas. He kept his management and security officials aware of his travels. He has 
faithfully served the United States in conflict areas while on active duty and as a 
government contractor. Overall, the Applicant and his spouse’s ties to the U.S. far 
outweigh their ties to Russia, and I would expect that he would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to Russia are less significant than his 
connections to the United States. His connections to the U.S. and limited contact with 
his in-laws in Russia and Russian friend in the U.S., taken together are sufficient to fully 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence 
concerns under Guideline B are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
10 
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence 
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
raised in the SOR. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
