1 
 
 
 
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
  (Redacted)  )   ISCR Case No. 16-02788 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed delinquent credit card debt totaling $16,167, past-due utility services 
(electric and gas) debt of $730, a charged-off bank debt of $795, and a $91 cable services 
debt in collection as of October 2016. More progress is needed toward resolving her past-
due debts. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The SOR explained why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue security clearance eligibility for her. The DOD CAF took the 
action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On November 10, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). On March 2, 2017, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to 
determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. On March 10, 2017, I scheduled a hearing for March 29, 
2017. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Before the introduction of any evidence, the 
Government withdrew the Guideline E allegation. Four Government exhibits (GEs 1-4) and 
six Applicant exhibits (AEs A-G) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on April 6, 2017. 
 
I held the record open until April 28, 2017, for Applicant to submit additional 
documentation. No further exhibits were submitted by the deadline. Accordingly, the record 
closed on April 28, 2017. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4 establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require national security eligibility 
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Summary of Pleadings 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline F that, as of October 2016, Applicant owed eight 
delinquent debts: $795 charged off by a bank (SOR ¶ 1.a); $331 charged off by a utility 
provider (SOR ¶ 1.b); a debt (no amount alleged) charged off by a bank (SOR ¶ 1.c); credit 
card collection balances of $10,355 (SOR  ¶ 1.d), $985 (SOR ¶ 1.e), and $5,832 (SOR ¶ 
1.j); $321 placed for collection by a gas services company (SOR ¶ 1.f); $124 in collection 
by a resort (SOR ¶ 1.g); $91 in collection for cable services (SOR ¶ 1.h); and $78 in 
collection by an electric company (SOR ¶ 1.i). Applicant provided a detailed response to 
the SOR allegations in which she admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.h-
1.j. She indicated that she would contact her creditors to either pay or establish repayment 
plans for her debts. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e because she had not been able 
to verify the debts. She denied owing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g because it had been paid. 
Applicant attributed her delinquencies to making poor financial decisions regarding retail 
credit cards and overdraft protection when she was in college; using a credit card to cover 
expenses after she bought a house with a longtime boyfriend and not receiving any 
correspondence from the creditor after she moved in October 2015; and being a single 
mother receiving $24 a week in child support only occasionally.  
 
 
                                                          
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old college graduate who began working for a defense 
contractor as a human resources and security assistant in September 2015. Applicant has 
never been married. She has a six-year-old daughter. (GE 1; Tr. 30, 32.) 
 
The summer following high school, Applicant opened a bank account that had 
overdraft protection (SOR ¶ 1.a). (Tr. 23, 33.) She was extended $3,000 in credit to be 
repaid at $20 a month. (GE 3.) She worked part time while in college and did not 
completely understand overdraft protection. She used the credit beyond what she could 
afford to repay, and her entire paycheck went to pay charges on the overdraft account. (Tr. 
33-34.) 
 
Applicant obtained joint student loans of $5,347 in September 1999, $5,882 in 
September 2000, $5,882 in September 2001, and $5,000 in September 2002 to pay for 
college. She obtained individual student loans of $1,076 and $1,549 in October 1999 that 
were paid as of September 2008. She also opened a few credit card accounts. (GE 3.) In 
May 2003, Applicant earned her bachelor’s degree. (GE 1.) 
 
In September 2003, Applicant and her then significant other purchased a home. 
They obtained a first mortgage of $249,600 and a second mortgage of $62,400. Applicant 
was employed as an account manager for a commercial printing company from April 2004 
to February 2010 earning about $75,000 annually by the end of her employment. She 
obtained additional credit cards, some of which were used for home improvements. (GEs 
1, 3; Tr. 23, 38-39.) When Applicant and her boyfriend ended their relationship, he 
assumed legal liability for the mortgage debt but for repaying none of the credit card debts 
incurred for the house. (GE 1; Tr. 23.) 
 
Applicant lost her job when the printing company closed down in approximately 
March 2010. (Tr. 39.) She was unemployed through December 2012. Her daughter was 
born in January 2011, and Applicant decided not to look for work. In January 2013, 
Applicant began working part time as a consultant for a public assistance program, but she 
resigned after nine months because of difficulty finding daycare for her daughter that could 
accommodate her schedule. A friend offered to watch Applicant’s daughter for her, so 
Applicant and her daughter moved across the country. Applicant earned $10 an hour 
working in retail sales, but the cost of living was much lower. (GE 1; Tr. 54-55.) 
 
In August 2015, Applicant moved back to her present area to be near family. 
Applicant and her daughter stayed with her sister until November 2015, when Applicant 
began renting her own apartment. (Tr. 48-49.) In September 2015, Applicant started her 
current employment at $19 an hour. (GE 1; AE C; Tr. 54.) 
 
4 
 
On October 26, 2015, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86) for a DOD secret clearance so that she could perform duties as an 
alternate facility security officer (FSO) for her employer. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 32.) On 
November 11, 2015, a check of Applicant’s credit revealed that her old overdraft account 
had been charged off for $795 in January 2013 after six months of inactivity (SOR ¶ 1.a). A 
$331 utility debt had been charged off in August 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b). A retail charge account 
reportedly had a zero balance after having been charged off in September 2012 (SOR ¶ 
1.c). A $615 debt placed by an optical retailer had been placed for collection in May 2012 
(SOR ¶ 1.e).2 A $10,355 credit card debt was placed for collection in September 2013 
(SOR ¶ 1.d), but there had been activity on the account as recently as August 2015. (GE 
3.) Applicant testified that she made payments of $25-$50 when she could afford to do so 
from approximately October 2013 to August 2015, when she moved back home. (Tr. 21, 
23, 39-40.) She “lost track of it” after she moved and made no further payments. (Tr. 40.) 
 
A cable services collection debt of $91 from April 2009 had not been paid (SOR ¶ 
1.h) as of November 2015. An electric utility balance of $78 from July 2013 was in 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.i). A gas company had placed a $321 debt for collection in January 
2014 (SOR ¶ 1.f). Applicant apparently did not receive the final bills for those services after 
she moved. (Answer; Tr. 19.) A former landlord placed a $124 debt for collection (SOR ¶ 
1.g), which she learned was for cleaning services for an apartment that she had cleaned 
before moving. Applicant had inquired about any outstanding charges in July 2015 and 
received no response. (AE G.) Applicant’s credit report also showed that she had repaid 
some credit card balances under terms acceptable to her creditors. Likewise, she had no 
history of late payments on her student loans, although it is unclear whether she or the co-
marker was making the payments. Applicant was making timely payments of approximately 
$212 per month on a car lease obtained for $7,625 in May 2015. (GE 3.) 
 
 On April 5, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant was asked about the adverse credit 
information on her credit report, including the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-h. Applicant did not 
recognize them, but she indicated that she would make repayment arrangements for those 
debts she could verify. She described her financial situation as fair in that she lives from 
paycheck to paycheck. Applicant volunteered that she would soon be filing for full custody 
of her daughter. (GE 2.) 
 
 On April 6, 2016, Applicant contacted the collection entity that she believed was 
holding her credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant was advised that the debt would be 
transferred for collection to an entity in her area. She had heard nothing further as of her 
hearing in March 2017, but she indicated that she would continue her efforts to locate the 
debt so that she could make payments. (AE E; Tr. 21.) 
 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s November 2015 credit report showed that a $615 debt from December 2009 had been placed for 
collection and transferred by an optical retailer to the collection entity in SOR ¶ 1.e. As of October 2015, the 
collection entity was reporting a $985 balance, possibly due to interest on the unpaid balance. (GE 3.) As of 
September 2016, the collection entity was reporting a $615 balance on the debt. (GE 4.) 
5 
 
Applicant’s income tax refunds for tax year 2015 went to pay the lawyer that 
represented her in her custody battle for her daughter. She paid $3,500 to her attorney in 
2016, but was successful in gaining full custody of her daughter in September 2016. (Tr. 
26-27, 30.) As of late March 2017, Applicant had not received a bill, which may or may not 
be forthcoming, for the services of a private investigator hired to find her daughter’s father. 
(Tr. 30.) 
 
As of September 2, 2016, Equifax was reporting that Applicant owed a $5,832 credit 
card debt placed for collection in April 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.j). That account first became 
delinquent in January 2010. An old account from her college days, she attributed the debt 
to having only part-time income at that time. (Answer; Tr. 46.) The past-due debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a ($795), 1.e ($615), and 1.f ($321) were still on her credit report. Applicant’s student 
loans had a total balance of $10,415 and were being repaid on time at $200 per month. 
Applicant was making timely payments on her car lease and had reduced the balance to 
$4,444. (GE 4.) Applicant opened a credit card account with a clothing retailer in December 
2016 to purchase clothing for her growing daughter. As of late February 2017, her account 
had a $125 current balance, which Applicant paid during the next billing cycle. (AE G; Tr. 
22-23.) She has no other open credit card accounts. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 At her annual performance evaluation in September 2016, Applicant was promoted 
to the position of human resource administrator at an hourly wage of almost $23. (Tr. 54.) 
According to the company’s human resource officer, Applicant was promoted because of 
her excellent work performance and dedication to her duties. (AE C.) After the SOR was 
issued, Applicant’s interim secret clearance was withdrawn in October 2016. Applicant 
continued to perform as an “instrumental member” of the human resources team, but she 
no longer served as alternate FSO. (AE B.) 
 
 On November 10, 2016, Applicant indicated in response to the SOR that she began 
to rectify her debts after meeting with the OPM investigator and that she would have 
payment plans in place for all her debts by March 2017. (Answer.) As of late February 
2017, Applicant’s student loans (total balance $9,222) and car lease (balance $3,189) had 
no history of late payments. However, there had been no reported progress toward 
resolving her past-due debts, including those in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.i, and 1.g. (AE G.) 
 
 Applicant paid $85 on March 27, 2017, to fully satisfy the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. (Tr. 19-
20, 45.) On March 28, 2017, Applicant sent an email to the creditor in SOR 1.g to inquire 
about payment of the debt for cleaning services. (AE G; Tr. 43-44.) She had not received 
any response as of her hearing. Applicant had not made any effort to contact the creditor in 
SOR ¶ 1.a about the $795 in overdraft debt that was charged off. She thought that 
because the debt had been written off by the creditor, there was nothing that she could do 
about the debt which would remain as a strike against her credit. (Tr. 35, 53.) Similarly, 
Applicant had not reached out to the utility company about the $331 debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, to 
the bank in SOR ¶ 1.c, or to the collection entity about the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.j 
because they had been charged off or were closed. (Tr. 36-38, 47-48.) Applicant did not 
recognize the credit grantor in SOR ¶ 1.e, so she made no payments on that debt. (Tr. 42.) 
She acknowledged the $321 natural gas debt (SOR ¶ 1.f) as being the last bill from her 
6 
 
apartment before she moved in July 2014, but she had made no payments as of late 
March 2017. (Tr. 42.) She had also not made any payments toward her old cable bill in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. (Tr. 45.) Applicant presented no documentation of progress toward some of the 
debts in the SOR despite the opportunity for post-hearing submissions. 
 
Applicant and the father of her daughter initially agreed that he would pay $25 a 
month for child support deposited into a bank account that she can access by debit card. 
His payments have been irregular, and he and Applicant have had no contact in the last 
two years. She does not rely on his child support payments. (Tr. 50.) Applicant’s rent is 
$900 a month. Daycare for her daughter costs $460 a month. After paying her monthly 
expenses, Applicant has only $20 a month in discretionary income.3 (AE D; Tr. 22.) In 
March 2017, she received her federal and state income tax refunds totaling $4,000 for tax 
year 2016. She expressed her intention to use half of her refund to resolve her outstanding 
debts, including the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, and to save the other half for 
unexpected expenses. Her daughter needed to be evaluated for behavioral issues, and 
Applicant’s insurance would not completely cover the cost. (Tr. 27-29.) 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s manager considers Applicant to be a responsible person with strong 
ethics and integrity who does not pose a security risk. Applicant received two awards at 
work in addition to her promotion. Applicant’s living situation was discussed in the office 
and this manager knows that it was important for Applicant to find an apartment that she 
could afford on her salary. Applicant advised her manager that she had old debt and 
needed to be able to support herself without incurring any new delinquency. Based on her 
observations and conversations with Applicant, this manager believes Applicant is doing all 
that she can to get back on track financially while providing a comfortable childhood for her 
daughter. (AE A.) 
 
 Another co-worker in human resources highly recommends Applicant for security 
clearance eligibility. From her first day, Applicant showed herself to be “a responsible 
dedicated employee with excellent communication skills, highly motivated, [and] eager to 
learn new tasks . . . .”  Aware that Applicant is raising her daughter with no involvement 
from her daughter’s father, this human resource officer indicates that Applicant 
occasionally works from home without any issues. (AE C.) 
 
 The assistant FSO described Applicant as “an instrumental member of the Human 
Resources team.” A trusted employee, Applicant has been reliable and punctual in her 
attendance and always willing to assist her colleagues to ensure goals are met. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
                                                          
3 Applicant presented a budget (AE D) which did not include any student loan payments. She listed $600 for 
food and toiletries. Applicant did not elaborate about her student loans, but they are rated as current. 
7 
 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are articulated in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
8 
 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result 
from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
 An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is required to manage her finances 
in a way as to exhibit sound judgment and responsibility. Applicant exhibited poor financial 
judgment in some aspects. Several years ago, she overextended herself financially on an 
overdraft account and some credit cards. More recently, Applicant moved from some 
apartments without paying final bills for natural gas, electricity, and cable services. 
Apparently, she was unaware of some of those debts, but there is no evidence that she 
acted promptly to follow up with her creditors to ensure that she owed no outstanding 
balances. Applicant does not dispute her liability for the delinquencies in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.b, 
1.d, 1.f, and 1.h-1.j. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 Applicant does not acknowledge that she had a charged off account with the creditor 
bank in SOR ¶ 1.c, or that she owes the $985 collection debt in SOR ¶ 1.e or the $124 
cleaning fee in SOR ¶ 1.g. A review of available credit reports indicates that the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e was placed for collection by an optical retailer in May 2012 for $615. As of 
November 2015, the collection agency was claiming a $985 balance. The debt for cleaning 
services was listed on her November 2015 and March 2017 credit reports. Concerning 
SOR ¶ 1.c, the creditor bank reported a zero balance as of November 2015, but after a 
charge off in September 2012. The Appeal Board has held that adverse information from a 
credit report is normally sufficient to meet the substantial evidence standard to establish a 
debt. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03612 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015.) Available credit report 
information is sufficient to establish the $615 and $124 collection balances and to apply AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) because of those debts. Applicant’s belated inquiry about the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.g is not enough to disprove her liability for the debt. However, there is a 
reasonable basis to dispute that Applicant owes an outstanding balance to the creditor in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. AG ¶ 20(e) applies, but only to that debt. It provides: 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of presenting evidence of explanation, extenuation, or 
mitigation to overcome the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Under the AG 
effective for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017, a record of consumer delinquency 
may be mitigated under one or more of the following conditions under ¶ 20: 
9 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not mitigate the security concerns raised by ongoing delinquency. 
Applicant made inquiries around July or August 2015 about the debts in SOR ¶ 1.d and 
1.g, but then did nothing while waiting to hear from the creditors. She did not recognize the 
debts on her credit report when questioned by the OPM investigator in April 2016, but she 
indicated that she would take steps to verify her debts and make repayment arrangements. 
In response to the SOR, she indicated in November 2016 that she would have repayment 
plans in place by March 2017. Yet, by her hearing in late March 2017, she had not reached 
out to most of her creditors and had not made any payments on most of her past-due 
debts. She had resolved only the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) has some applicability because of Applicant’s lengthy unemployment 
from March 2010 through December 2012 and her limited income after she returned to 
work. No information was provided about her income while she was employed as a part-
time consultant for a public assistance entity from January 2013 to September 2013, but 
her wage was only $10 an hour in retail sales from October 2013 to August 2015. Applicant 
testified that she made some payments of $25-$50 when she could afford to do so toward 
the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. It is unclear how many payments she made on that debt. 
Applicant is unlikely to have made much progress on that debt given her limited income at 
the time. Applicant’s employment with a defense contractor in September 2015 provided 
stable income at $19 an hour initially, but she also had daycare, rent, and other living 
expenses with little to no financial assistance from her daughter’s father. The custody 
battle for her daughter cost her $3,500 in legal fees that she paid with her income tax 
refund for 2015. While acknowledging that her income tax refund could instead have been 
applied to her old delinquencies, Applicant was seemingly unaware of some of the debts 
or, in the case of the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, was waiting to hear about the transfer 
of her account for collection to a local entity. 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) have limited applicability. Despite her promotion at work 
in September 2016, which raised her hourly wage to $23, Applicant had satisfied only the 
smallest debt in the SOR, i.e., the $78 utility debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In the whole-person evaluation, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4 Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under 
Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
  
 The security clearance adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s 
personal debts. Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). In evaluating Guideline F cases under the whole-person 
concept, the Appeal Board has established that an applicant is not required to pay off 
every debt in the SOR: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not require, as a matter of law, to 
establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that 
is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has established a plan to 
resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that 
plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s 
financial situation and evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic.  
 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). In evaluating Applicant’s overall financial situation, Applicant’s 
outstanding delinquencies total approximately $18,834, and she has little discretionary 
income to put toward her old debt. It is unclear who is paying her student loans, although 
she has a track record of timely payments on her car lease. Applicant also demonstrated 
some financial responsibility by not overspending on consumer credit in recent years. She 
has opened only one credit card since 2009, which is with a retailer so that she can provide 
clothes for her growing daughter, and her account is rated as current. There is no evidence 
of frivolous expenditure that could further compromise her financial situation going forward. 
                                                          
4 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
11 
 
Yet, some doubts persist about her commitment and ability to resolve the financial issues 
of concern to the DOD. As of her hearing in March 2017, Applicant had recently received 
her income tax refunds totaling $4,000 for tax year 2016. She testified about her intention 
to set aside half of her refund for paying her old debts. I kept the record open for 30 days 
after the hearing, but Applicant submitted no additional evidence. Applicant is not required 
to pay off all her debts, but she can reasonably be expected to make more progress than 
an eleventh hour payment of $85 to resolve one debt. 
 
 Applicant’s manager and co-workers endorse her for security clearance eligibility 
based on their observations of her work performance and what they know about her efforts 
to ensure she incurs no new delinquency. This evidence weighs in her favor, but it is also 
well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See 
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). Her financial problems are not 
sufficiently resolved. This decision should not be construed as a determination that 
Applicant cannot or will not show sufficient financial stability and a state of reform 
necessary to be eligible for a security clearance in the future, but she needs to show more 
progress toward addressing her old debts. For the reasons noted above, I conclude that it 
is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant security clearance 
eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
