 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02486 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, alcohol consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 1 
                                                          
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2016, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned me on January 18, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 13, 2017, and the hearing was 
held as scheduled on April 10, 2017. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list 
was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record remained 
open until May 12, 2017, and Applicant submitted AE D through F, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 20, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted all the allegations. The admissions are 
adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is married and has a stepson. He has worked for a 
defense contractor since December 2010. He is a high school graduate.2   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was charged with underage possession or 
consumption of alcohol in 2002 and driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) on four 
occasions: April 2005; April 2007; June 2013; and October 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e). 
  
 Applicant began drinking alcohol socially with his friends when he was about 19 
years old. In October 2002, he was drinking alcohol at a friend’s house while underage. 
The police responded to a noise complaint and Applicant was cited for underage 
drinking. He paid a fine, was required to do community service, and completed an 
alcohol education class.3   
 
 By the time Applicant was 22, he was consuming five to six drinks two to three 
times a week. In April 2005, Applicant was out drinking with friends. He had drunk two 
pitchers of beer and three to four shots of whiskey. He drove to his work place parking 
lot and planned to sleep there so he would not miss making work in the morning. A 
police officer woke him up and asked what he was doing. Applicant explained and the 
officer told him to stay there for the night. After the officer left, Applicant decided to drive 
home. He was stopped by the same officer. He was given and failed field sobriety tests. 
He later registered a BAC (blood alcohol content) of .18 percent. He pleaded guilty to 
driving while impaired. He received a suspended sentence, was fined, was placed on 12 
months’ probation, and completed level-two alcohol awareness classes.4 
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 5; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 23; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 Tr. 24; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In April 2007, he was stopped by police for having a broken tail light. Earlier that 
evening, while playing in a band at a local bar, he consumed two pitchers of beer and 
several shots of whiskey. He failed the field sobriety tests he was given and his BAC 
registered .20 percent. He was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). 
He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 40 hours community service, 60 hours of home 
detention, and was fined. He also took alcohol education classes. He lost his driver’s 
license for 18 months.5 
 
 After his 2007 DUI, Applicant stopped drinking alcohol for a period of time. In 
January 2013, Applicant spoke to a defense investigator during his background 
investigation. When asked about his past alcohol issues, Applicant stated that he had 
no intentions of ever getting another DUI again. In June 2013, Applicant was drinking at 
a bar after having an argument with his wife. He consumed three to four beers and 
shots of whiskey at the bar. He was driving his motorcycle at the time. He went to 
another bar and drank another beer and several more shots of whiskey. When he 
attempted to drive home he lost control of his motorcycle and put it on the ground. The 
police responded and he was given field sobriety tests, which he failed. His BAC 
registered at .28 percent He was arrested for DUI. He pleaded guilty and was 
sentenced to 96 hours community service, 60 days jail time (through a work-release 
program), a fine, 86 hours of level-two education classes, and two years’ supervised 
probation. His probation ended in July 2015.6 
 
 In October 2015, Applicant had an argument with his wife and left the house. He 
stopped at a liquor store and picked up some beer. He was driving with an open beer 
when he was stopped by law enforcement for erratic driving. The officer saw the open 
beer and arrested Applicant for DUI. In April 2016, he was convicted of a felony DUI and 
sentenced to two years jail time (allowed work release, which he is currently doing), four 
years supervised probation (ending April 2020), 120 hours public service, and 86 hours 
of alcohol therapy, including a mental health evaluation, and fines.7 
 
 Applicant underwent a psychosocial assessment in November 2016. He was 
evaluated by a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) who is a certified addiction 
counselor (CAC). The evaluation stated: 
 
The client meets criteria for a current diagnosis of Alcohol-Use-Disorder, 
Severe. The client meets 11 of 11 criteria. The client has continued to 
drink despite ongoing legal issues caused by his use. He admitted his use 
impacted his ability to parent, caused him to lose multiple jobs, and 
damaged his interpersonal relationships. He has tried multiple times to 
control and stop his use without success. He reported intense cravings 
                                                          
5 Tr. 25; GE 2, 3. 
 
6 Tr. 27-30; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. 31-32; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
and symptoms of withdrawal, to include shaking and malaise. He reported 
an increase in tolerance and repeatedly drank in dangerous situations. His 
patterns of use indicate a great deal of time spent in activities related to 
drinking. He gave up hobbies like hockey and playing guitar because of 
his drinking. He reported often drinking more than he originally intended.8 
 
 Applicant claims he has been abstinent since November 2015. He acknowledges 
that he is an alcoholic. He is not currently attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
because of his work release schedule and because the county detention center does 
not have in-house AA meetings. He stated he will begin attending AA once he is able to 
do so. He has not attended an inpatient alcohol treatment program. His current 
employer is willing to allow him to continue employment if he were to enroll into an 
alcohol rehabilitation program.9 
 
 Applicant presented a letter from his probation officer indicating that as of March 
2017, he was in compliance with the terms of his probation. He also presented 
documentary evidence showing that he was enrolled in level-two education and therapy 
classes. He also offered two reference letters from current colleagues and supervisors. 
They describe Applicant as an excellent employee and someone who is professional 
and conscientious. They recommend continuation of his security clearance.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
                                                          
8 AE F. 
 
9 Tr. 34-35, 38, 43; AE E. 
 
10 AE C. 
 
 
5 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder;  
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
6 
 
 
 (d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant’s five alcohol incidents, including four DUI arrests in 2005, 2007, 2013, 
and 2015, and his alcohol use disorder diagnosis support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in 
accordance with treatment recommendations; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant’s last adverse alcohol incident occurred in October 2015, shortly after 
he ended his probation from an earlier DUI. His alcohol-related incidents have not been 
infrequent having been arrested or charged five times since 2002. He committed to not 
having any future DUI incidents when interviewed by an investigator in January 2013, 
but he has had two more since that time. Since he has had no inpatient treatment and is 
still incarcerated, I cannot conclude that an alcohol-related incident will not recur in the 
future. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. 
 
 Even though Applicant acknowledges his alcoholism, he has not received the 
required treatment or counseling to address his problem. Although he claims abstinence 
since November 2015, he has done so in the artificial environment of detention. It is 
unclear what he will do once his freedom is fully restored. In the past, he has resorted to 
abusing alcohol once again. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. 
 
 Although Applicant has participated in several alcohol education courses, there is 
no evidence to support his participation in any alcohol treatment programs. AG ¶ 23(d) 
does not apply. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s compliance 
with his current probation, letters of recommendation, and his personal circumstances. 
However, I also considered that he has had five alcohol incidents since 2002 and that 
he has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. Applicant failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
