 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01331 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding personal conduct. 
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a set of interrogatories. Applicant responded to those 
interrogatories on May 16, 2017.2 On June 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
                                                          
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated August 18, 2015). 
 
2 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated May 16, 2017). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.3 The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons 
why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 13, 2017. On June 27, 2017, he responded 
to the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
However, on July 12, 2017, pursuant to ¶ E3.1.7, Additional Procedural Guidance 
(Enclosure 3), of the Directive, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on July 21, 2017. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2017. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on August 4, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 
22, 2017. 
 
During the hearing, 2 Government exhibits (GE) 1 and GE 2, and 17 Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE Q were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 30, 2017. The record closed on 
August 30, 2017. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of 50 U.S.C. § 
3802, War and National Defense, Military Selective Service: Registration.4 Facts are 
                                                          
 
3 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
4 §3802. Registration 
 
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter it shall be the duty of every male citizen of the United 
States, and every other male person residing in the United States, who, on the day or days fixed for 
the first or any subsequent registration, is between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six, to present 
himself for and submit to registration at such time or times and place or places, and in such manner, 
as shall be determined by proclamation of the President and by rules and regulations prescribed 
hereunder. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any alien lawfully admitted to the 
United States as a nonimmigrant under section 1101(a)(15) of title 8, for so long as he continues to 
maintain a lawful nonimmigrant status in the United States. 
 
(b) Regulations prescribed pursuant to subsection (a) may require that persons presenting 
themselves for and submitting to registration under this section provide, as part of such registration, 
such identifying information (including date of birth, address, and social security account number) as 
such regulations may prescribe. 
 
(June 24, 1948, ch. 625, title I, §3, 62 Stat. 605 ; June 19, 1951, ch. 144, title I, §1(c), 65 Stat. 76 ; Pub. L. 92–129, title 
I, §101(a)(2), Sept. 28, 1971, 85 Stat. 348 ; Pub. L. 97–86, title IX, §916(a), Dec. 1, 1981, 95 Stat. 1129 .) 
 
3 
                                      
 
proper for administrative notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source 
and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on the 
United States Code. After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and 
assessing the relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, 
pursuant to Rule 201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of 50 U.S.C. 
§ 3802. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied, with comments, both of the factual 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.) of the SOR. Applicant’s 
comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an alarm 
technician with his employer since September 2012. He had previously been an 
electronics technician with a casino from 2005 until 2010, when he was part of a mass 
layoff. He is a 1994 high school graduate. He has never served with the U.S. military. He 
was granted a top-secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
information (TS-SCI) in 2013. Applicant was married in 2003. He has a son, born in 1996, 
and a daughter, born in 2004.  
  
Personal Conduct 
On August 18, 2015, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to certain 
questions in Section 14 pertaining to his Selective Service Records. The first question 
was if he is a male born after December 31, 1959, and he responded “yes.” The second 
question asked if he had registered with the Selective Service System (SSS), and he 
responded “no.”5 He explained his reasons for not registering with the SSS as follows:6 
Honestly, I had no idea I was supposed to, even before I graduated I can’t 
remember this topic ever coming up. Over the years though I have talked 
to people about this and I was always told there was no need to. But I guess 
                                                          
On June 27, 1980, President Jimmy Carter, in addressing implementation of sections of the Military Selective 
Service Act, as amended (50 U.S.C. App. 451 et seq.) [now 50 U.S.C. 3801 et seq.], proclaimed as follows: 
§1–101. Male citizens of the United States and other males residing in the United States, unless 
exempted by the Military Selective Service Act, as amended, who were born on or after January 1, 
1960, and who have attained their eighteenth birthday, shall present themselves for registration in 
the manner and at the time and places as hereinafter provided. . . § 1–105. Persons born on or after 
January 1, 1963, shall present themselves for registration on the day they attain the 18th anniversary 
of their birth or on any day within the period of 60 days beginning 30 days before such date; however, 
in no event shall such persons present themselves for registration prior to January 5, 1981. 
5 Failing to register or comply with the Military Selective Service Act is a felony punishable by a fine of up to 
$250,000 or a prison term of up to five years, or a combination of both. See https://www.sss.gov/registration/why-
register/benefits-and-penalties 
 
6 GE 1, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
4 
                                      
 
everyone was wrong. So presently here are the steps that I am taking to 
resolve this issue. On August 29, 2012, I had gone to the Selective Service 
website and downloaded a Request for Status information letter and I filled 
it out. It was mailed to them on August 30, 2012. Since then, I have received 
a letter on September 14, 2012 that I had given to my manager to put with 
my file. 
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator with the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on August 11, 2016. When he was initially questioned by the 
investigator regarding his failure to register with the SSS, Applicant responded that he 
was not previously aware his registration was required when he turned 18 years old, 
essentially the same reasons as he had previously offered. However, upon a more 
rigorous confrontation, Applicant’s story changed.7 
[Applicant] admitted that he intentionally, and with the intent to deceive, 
falsified his security forms with regards to the information reported regarding 
his Selective Service registration. [Applicant] confirmed he was born after 
December 31, 1959. [Applicant] intentionally and willfully failed to register 
with the Selective Service when he turned 18 years old. [Applicant] admitted 
he was aware of the requirement to register with the Selective Service, and 
he originally learned about it during his high school years. At the time, 
[Applicant] had no intent of going into the military, and intentionally did not 
register or pursue registration because of that. [Applicant] originally 
indicated on his security forms that he never knew that he had to register 
because he felt it was less embarrassing to state he never knew, than to 
admit he intentionally did not register. [Applicant] also knew that his 
intentional failure to register could preclude [him] from certain benefits, 
which may have included his job. [Applicant] was afraid that if he listed he 
intentionally failed to register for Selective Service, he may not have gotten 
his current job . . . . No one else knows [Applicant] willfully failed to register 
with the Selective Service. 
[Applicant] took additional actions to conceal his failure to register with the 
Selective Service. Upon [his] initially completing his employment paperwork 
with [his current employer], [Applicant] was asked about his registration for 
Selective Service by his [supervisor], Security Manager. [Applicant] lied 
about his prior knowledge of having to register. [Applicant], after knowing 
he had never registered, checked the Selective Service Registration 
website, which confirmed he had never registered. [Applicant] then 
submitted a Request for Status Information letter to the Selective Service, 
which was sent [in August] 2012. [Applicant] received a letter back from 
Selective Service, dated [September] 2012, which confirmed [Applicant] 
was required to register, but never did. [Applicant] was notified that he could 
no longer register because he was over 26 years of age. The letter went on 
to state there were federal penalties associated with the willful failure to 
                                                          
7 Personal Subject Interview, dated August 11, 2016, at 3-4, attached to GE 2, supra note 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
register with the Selective Service; however, the letter also stated that if 
someone did not willfully fail to register, then by law they could not be 
disciplined or denied employment. [Applicant] felt his failure to register was 
a “hot Topic” with regards to his employment with [his employer]. So 
[Applicant] simply stated he was never aware. [Applicant] took no other 
actions to conceal his failure to register. 
On May 10, 2017, in responding to the interrogatories, Applicant submitted yet 
another version of the facts:8 
[I]n regards to my U.S. Selective Service record; I never tried to be 
deceitful in regards to this matter, nor was I attempting to conceal my failure 
to register. When I was going into my senior year of high school or 
approaching 18 years of age, I don’t remember my school counselor or 
teachers explaining to myself or classmates that it was a requirement to 
register. At that time in my life, I had no intent of joining the military, therefore 
would never have inquired about this topic or have been made aware of it. 
. . . When I was interviewed by the investigator on this matter, yes, I was 
embarrassed because I had to admit (again) that I didn’t know I had to 
register upon turning 18 years old. I don’t feel this makes me an 
untrustworthy person. I am just an individual who lacked guidance when I 
was a minor and I am apologizing once again for this. 
 In his June 2017 Answer to the SOR, Applicant offered a combination version of 
the facts, especially as they related to the OPM interview:9 
. . . I do feel as if there was some confusion on my part or his or both of 
ours. When asked the question of “Have you registered for the SSS?”, my 
answer was “no” that I had not registered and when I was asked the reason 
being, I replied “I didn’t know that I was required to do so. I was simply 
unaware.” After discussing this with the investigator at length and answering 
more of his questions, I did say that in hindsight, I wish that I had. Meaning, 
I wish that I had known that this was something mandatory upon turning 18 
years of age. I also discussed with the investigator during the interview how 
I remember seeing Army recruiters walking around my high school. I had 
no intent on joining a military branch so disregarded their visit. The staff/or 
teachers didn’t advise students to register with the SSS. 
. . . I feel as if my words were taken out of context which is why the report 
[of the Personal Subject Interview] seemed contradictory to my original 
report dating back to 2012. I don’t recall telling the investigator that I 
purposefully concealed the fact that I deliberately didn’t register with the 
SSS. I have never hidden this or had any reason to do so. I did not fear 
                                                          
8 Letter from Applicant, dated May 10, 2017, attached to GE 2, supra note 2. 
 
9 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 27, 2017, at 1-2. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
admittance would preclude me from obtaining employment. . . . The only 
thing I have is embarrassment for never knowing that I had an obligation to 
do this when I was younger. . . . 
I never meant to misinform the investigator or seem dishonest during my 
interview. I do get nervous when I am talked to, or interrogated, about my 
failure to register with the SSS because I’m often made to feel like my 
reason or answer is inadequate; however my answer has always been the 
truth . . . I was uninformed and as a result I didn’t register because I simply 
didn’t know that I was required to do so.  
During the hearing, Applicant’s comments again covered a broad range related to 
his failure to register with the SSS. He stated: “. . . I personally believe that the. . . 
investigator didn’t want to take my answer for no, I don’t know. He didn’t want that answer, 
so he kept pressing me, pressing me, pressing me.” When it was noted by Department 
Counsel that Applicant’s interview statement said that Applicant had admitted that he had 
intentionally, and with intent to deceive, falsified the security form with regard to the 
Selective Service registration, Applicant denied ever saying or admitting that. When 
discussing the military recruiters at his high school, Applicant denied what had been 
reported and stated that the information was again taken out of context. Applicant also 
denied ever acknowledging that his failure to register could preclude him from certain 
benefits. In Applicant’s view, most of the comments and acknowledgments attributed to 
Applicant in the Personal Subject Interview, other than the admissions regarding not 
being aware of the registration requirement, were mere fabrications made by the 
investigator.10 
In September 2012, the SSS wrote Applicant acknowledging that a search of the 
SSS files and an examination of the information Applicant furnished them revealed that 
Applicant was required to register with the Selective Service, but he had not done so. He 
was informed that he could not register after attaining the age of 26. No notices were sent 
to him by the SSS regarding the requirement to register. The SSS also referred to 50 App. 
U.S.C. 462(g) which states:11 
(g) A person may not be denied a right, privilege, or benefit under Federal 
law by reason of failure to present himself for and submit to registration 
under section 3 (of the Military Selective Service Act) if – (1) the requirement 
for the person to so register has terminated or become inapplicable to the 
person; and (2) the person shows by a preponderance of the evidence that 
the failure to register was not a knowing and willful failure to register. 
The types of benefits referred to by SSS for which non-registrants are ineligible 
are: (1) federal student loans and grant programs; (2) federal job training under the 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 29-37. 
 
11 AE A (Letter, dated September 14, 2012). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act; (3) federal jobs; (4) a security clearance as a 
contractor; and (5) U.S. citizenship for immigrants.12 
While the focus of the SOR was on personal conduct issues of alleged falsifications 
and lack of candor in the e-QIP and during the OPM interview, the actual failure to register 
under the Military Selective Service Act was not specifically alleged in the SOR. I consider 
Applicant’s failure to register to be unalleged conduct.13 
Character References 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor and a number of colleagues have known and 
worked with Applicant over a variety of years, and they are all strongly supportive of him. 
Applicant’s reputation is a plethora of positive characteristics: dedicated and loyal worker, 
outstanding ethical behavior, unwavering integrity and professionalism, honesty, 
trustworthiness, hard-working, positive attitude, willingness to contribute, exceptional 
moral character, extremely reliable, team player, good judgment, mature outlook, 
focused, responsible, dependable, intelligent decision making, self-motivated, and 
intelligent.14 Former coworkers from his days at the casino are equally impressed by 
him.15 Neighbors and friends offered supportive comments regarding his community 
activities. Applicant is a great role model who has picked up neighbor-children from school 
when parents were unable to do so, he assisted a neighbor install a faucet, ceiling fan, 
and pool pump, assisted neighbors with weekend lawn maintenance, and he has 
volunteered to assist incapacitated neighbors.16 One friend who has known Applicant for 
19 years said that she had never witnessed Applicant “be purposefully deceptive, 
dishonest or unethical in any way, ever.”17 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
                                                          
12 See https:www.sss.gov/home/men-26-and-older 
 
13 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal Board in 
ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003). (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to 
assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether 
a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). I will consider it as part of the whole-person analysis. 
 
14 AE E (Character Reference, dated August 17, 2017); AE F (Character Reference, dated August 7, 2017); 
AE J (Character Reference, undated); AE K (Character Reference, dated August 15, 2017); AE L (Character Reference, 
dated August  2017); AE M (Character Reference, dated August 4, 2017); AE N (Character Reference, dated August 
7, 2017); AE O (Character Reference, dated August 15, 2017); AE Q (Character Reference, dated August 8, 2017). 
 
15 AE G (Character Reference, dated August 12, 2017); AE I (Character Reference, dated August 10, 2017). 
 
16 AE B (Character Reference, undated); AE C (Character Reference, undated); AE D (Character Reference, 
undated). 
 
17 AE P (Character Reference, dated August 18, 2017). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”18 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”19   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”20 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.21  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
                                                          
18 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
19 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
20 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
21 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”22  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”23 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision on any express 
or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an 
indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
                                                          
22 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
23 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The guideline notes some conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 As noted above, the focus of the SOR in this instance is not Applicant’s failure to 
register with the SSS, but rather what were his reasons for not doing so. The inquiries 
sought to determine if Applicant’s failure to register was a knowing and willful failure to 
register, or simple ignorance regarding registration requirements. Over the course of time, 
commencing with the e-QIP responses in August 2015, including the OPM interview 
comments in August 2016, the responses to interrogatories in May 2017, the June 2017 
Answer to the SOR, and culminating with his comments during the August 2017 hearing, 
Applicant’s sometimes inconsistent narratives merely exacerbated the issue. If Applicant 
was unaware of the registration requirement as he stated in the e-QIP, in which case he 
did not intentionally falsify the facts in his e-QIP response, but he did lie to the OPM 
investigator, or he told the OPM investigator the truth and he lied in the e-QIP.  
 
 Applicant strongly and repeatedly denied the comments that were attributed to him 
by the OPM investigator. He stated he was embarrassed because of his lack of 
knowledge regarding the registration requirements; his words were taken out of context 
by the OPM investigator; the OPM investigator did not want to accept Applicant’s reasons, 
and kept pressing him; that he did not recall telling the OPM investigator that he 
purposefully concealed the fact that he deliberately did not register; and that the OPM 
investigator’s rendition of what Applicant supposedly said were mere fabrications. 
 
Applicant’s numerous comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if his 
responses were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely a 
misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. Proof of an error in a response, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the response 
occurred. As an administrative judge, I must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine whether there is a direct or circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s 
intent or state of mind at the time the alleged falsification occurred. I have considered the 
entire record, including Applicant’s initial and subsequent comments.24 Applicant’s 
                                                          
24 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
 
11 
                                      
 
explanations for his submissions, in my view, were that he was finally being confronted 
with his actions from two decades earlier. On the one hand he would have me believe 
that he is mature enough to hold a security clearance, and on the other hand, he would 
have me believe that he is ignorant and naive regarding his SSS registration 
requirements. Those inconsistent explanations stretch credulity. The allegations that the 
OPM investigator fabricated the comments made by Applicant during the OPM interview, 
have merely added to my disbelief. Applicant acknowledged that when he was going into 
his senior year in high school, he recalled seeing Army recruiters walking around the high 
school, but because he had no intent on joining the military, he disregarded their visit and 
intentionally did not register with the SSS, although he was aware of the requirement to 
do so. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) have been established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
                                                          
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of education and other 
experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to disclose past-due debts on a security 
clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
12 
                                      
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
I have concluded that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s 
falsifications regarding the reasons for his failure to register with the SSS in his August 
2015 e-QIP and his OPM interview comments in August 2016, by intentionally failing to 
disclose the true reasons for his failure to register with the SSS two decades earlier, is 
recent, serious, and not mitigated. A key component of the protection of classified 
information is reliance on security clearance holders to accurately report potential 
compromise of classified information. A person who has offered false statements 
regarding past actions cannot be relied upon to report potential compromise of classified 
information. Applicant’s actions, or relative inaction, under the circumstances casts 
substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.25   
 
                                                          
25 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. 
Applicant is well thought of by his superiors, coworkers, friends, and neighbors. By all 
reports he is an outstanding employee, husband, father, and friend.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
During the period in which Applicant was required by the Military Selective Service Act to 
register with the SSS (from the age of 18 until the age of 26), he failed to do so. The 
failure was associated with his determination that he had no intent on joining the U.S. 
military, and although Applicant offered some commentary to the contrary, it was a 
knowing and willful failure to register. Had that conduct simply ended there, there might 
not be further significant interest in this case. However, the conduct did not cease. 
Instead, when questioned in the e-QIP and by an OPM investigator, Applicant tarnished 
his previously outstanding reputation for honesty and truthfulness, and he lied as to the 
reasons for not having registered with the SSS. He then continued with the false scenarios 
by lying in his answers to the interrogatories, when responding in the Answer to the SOR, 
and again during the hearing. Not only did he lie, he also contended that the OPM 
investigator had falsified his comments pertaining to the reasons why the non-registration 
took place. The OPM investigator had no reason to make false statements; Applicant did. 
 
Applicant argued that notwithstanding his failure to register with the SSS, because 
the period for registration has terminated, he cannot be denied a right, privilege, or benefit 
under federal law. He is only partially correct. The second portion of 50 App. U.S.C. 462(g) 
also requires that the non-registrant show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
failure to register was not a knowing and willful failure to register. Because of Applicant’s 
many variations of the facts, I concluded that he was merely covering up, in an attempt 
to avoid, the evidence of his knowing and willful failure to register. Under those 
circumstances, and in light of his differing scenarios, Applicant failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence, his inaction to register was unknowing and unwillful. 
 
Furthermore, as noted in the SSS website, non-registrants are ineligible for a 
security clearance as a contractor.  Moreover, as previously stated, “no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance.” In falsification issues, it is frequently said that the cover-up is 
worse than the actual action. Applicant’s vacillating stories and explanations are the most 
troubling features of this case. He was given several opportunities to state the truth, but 
he failed to take advantage of those opportunities. Applicant’s actions, under the 
circumstances, continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct. 
See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
  
 
14 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
