 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-00196 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 19, 2016. On 
April 24, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
DOD on September 1, 2006.1 
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4) was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines for all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017. SEAD 4 applies to all 
executive agencies. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 2, 2017, and 
the case was assigned to me on July 17, 2017. On July 25, 2017, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
September 6, 2017. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, presented the 
testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until September 22, 2017, to 
enable him to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AX G through L, which 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G 
through L are attached to the record as a hearing exhibit. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on September 14, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old project manager employed by a federal contractor. He 
has a high-school education. He was employed by the same federal contractor as a 
heating, ventilation, and cooling (HVAC) technician from January 2016 until he was 
promoted to his current position in March 2017. He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Before Applicant was hired by his current employer, he worked part time as a 
manager for a pool service company. He left this job because there was insufficient work, 
he was making less than $50,000 per year, and he was falling behind on his debt 
payments. After he was hired by his current employer, his salary has more than doubled, 
and he is able to pay all his financial obligations. (GX 1 at 12; Tr. 22.) As an HVAC 
technician, he earned about $46,000 per year; he now earns about $100,000 per year. 
(AX J; Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant married in January 1999, divorced in July 2004, married again in October 
2006, and divorced in August 2013. He has lived with a cohabitant since August 2013. 
He has four children, two of whom were born during his first marriage and for whom he 
was obligated to pay child support. His two youngest children, ages two and a newborn, 
live with him. (Tr. 24.) 
 
 Applicant and his second wife divorced by mutual agreement, without the 
assistance of lawyers. They informally agreed that his wife would pay the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i. Instead, she obtained a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, and the 
creditors sought payment from Applicant. (GX 3; Tr. 29-30.) 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $21,733, which are reflected 
in a credit report from February 2016. The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the 
SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: This debt is a delinquent motor vehicle loan ($6,579) that Applicant 
settled for $2,700 in May 2017. (AX B.) This debt was incurred when Applicant’s 
cohabitant (now his fiancée) became pregnant with their now two-year-old daughter. The 
pregnancy and related expenses were unexpected. To relieve the financial stress of the 
pregnancy, Applicant surrendered his vehicle and incurred a deficiency after the voluntary 
repossession and sale. (Tr. 31-32.) He settled the debt with a financial gift from his 
fiancée’s mother, with no obligation to repay it. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: This is a child-support arrearage ($4,683) that was satisfied in July 
2017. Applicant’s current obligation is $775 per month, and it is current. (AX A.) The 
payments are automatically deducted from his pay. (AX E; Tr. 21.) The arrearage was 
incurred because the child-support obligation was back-dated ten months to the date 
when his ex-wife petitioned the court to increase the amount of child support. (Tr. 34-35.) 
He paid the arrearage by charging a total of $1,000 to two credit cards, selling some 
personal property, and depleting his savings account. The credit-card debt he incurred to 
pay this debt has since been paid. (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: This is a delinquent cellphone bill ($1,816) that Applicant settled for 
$908. (AX D; AX H.) The debt was for Applicant’s cellphone, his ex-wife’s cellphone, and 
his daughter’s cellphone. He paid the debt by withdrawing money from his savings 
account. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: This is a delinquent cable bill ($422). Applicant settled it for $274, using 
funds from a checking account. (AX C; AX I; Tr. 38.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: This is the same debt as SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: This debt is for unreturned cable-service equipment ($1,300). It was 
charged off in February 2013. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt on the 
ground that his ex-wife agreed to pay it and then filed a bankruptcy petition. Around 
February 2016, Applicant hired a law firm to dispute this debt. (AX K; Tr. 39-40.) It is 
reflected as disputed in the February 2016 credit report and is not reflected in the credit 
reports from January and May 2017. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: This debt is a delinquent electric bill ($1,715). Applicant denied this 
debt for the same reason as SOR ¶ 1.f. It was referred for collection in November 2013. 
Applicant’s law firm disputed this debt. It is reflected as disputed in the February 2016 
credit report and is not reflected in the credit reports from January and May 2017. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: This debt is for satellite television service ($1,139). Applicant denied it 
for the same reason as SOR ¶ 1.f. It was referred for collection in April 2015, and 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s law firm disputed it. It is reflected as disputed in the February 2016 credit 
report and is not reflected in the credit reports from January and May 2017. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: This debt is for a fitness club membership ($572). Applicant denied it 
for the same reason as SOR ¶ 1.f. The February 2016 credit report does not reflect when 
it was referred for collection. Applicant testified that his law firm disputed this debt, but the 
February 2016 credit report does not reflect it as disputed. However, it is not reflected in 
the credit reports from January and May 2017. 
 
 All the debts in the SOR became delinquent after Applicant’s divorce in 2013. They 
were not required by the Fair Credit Reporting Act3 to be deleted from the credit reports. 
The fact that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i are not reflected in the more recent credit reports 
indicates that the disputes were resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant’s manager submitted three statements and testified at the hearing. He 
testified that Applicant has saved the U.S. Government close to $100,000 by his careful 
oversight of construction contracts. He testified that he interacts daily with Applicant, who 
“has shown nothing but integrity, honesty, innovation, and hard work in helping the 
government start up, operate, maintain, and manage a half-billion construction project 
we’re on right now.” (Tr. 52-55.) The manager’s three statements and a statement from 
Applicant’s systems administrator contain similar descriptions of Applicant’s performance 
and personal integrity. (AX F.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
                                                          
3 Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, a credit report may not list accounts placed for collection, charged 
off debts, or civil judgments that antedate the credit report by more than seven years, or until the statute of 
limitations has run, whichever is longer. The exceptions to this prohibition do not apply to these debts. 10 
U.S.C. § 1681c.  
 
 
5 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
6 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e are the same debt. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I have resolved the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
are sufficient to establish the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and 1.f-1.i and raise two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s underemployment before being hired by his 
current employer, his marital breakups, and his second wife’s failure to comply with her 
informal promise to resolve the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i were conditions largely beyond 
his control. He has acted responsibly by resolving the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, 
hiring a law firm, and successfully disputing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant hired a law firm to challenge the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i, but there is no evidence that the law firm is “a legitimate and 
credible source” of the financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. All these debts 
have been paid or settled. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f-1.i. The basis for 
disputing these debts is not fully documented, but the documentary evidence of 
Applicant’s contract with the law firm and the recent credit reports reflecting the deletion 
of these debts establish that they have been resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).4  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant has limited education, is 
financially unsophisticated, and was unfamiliar with the significance of his delinquent 
debts until he submitted his application for a security clearance. I found his testimony 
plausible, sincere, and credible. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
                                                          
4 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
8 
 
under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
