 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04865 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The Government failed to present sufficient evidence to establish facts 
alleged under Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for 
decisions issued after that date. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 7, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 17, 2016. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 through 7 
are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1992. He married in 
1985 and has an adult child. He served in the U.S. military from 1981 until he retired in 
2005. He had a three-month period of unemployment in 2014, but otherwise has been 
employed since he retired from the military. He has worked for his current employer, a 
federal contractor, since June 2015.1  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for two delinquent student loans (¶ 
1.a-$27,085 and ¶ 1.b-$8,796). In June 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigator as part of his background investigation. During the interview, he 
acknowledged to the investigator that he was the cosigner for his sister for the two student 
loans that are alleged in the SOR. The student loan in SOR ¶ 1.a was taken out in 
approximately 1996 or 1997. He and his sister agreed she would be responsible for the 
loans. He told the investigator that he had not been contacted by the creditor or told by 
his sister that the loan in SOR ¶ 1.a was delinquent or in collection. He indicated that if 
his sister was unable to pay the loans, he would make plans to pay them in full since he 
had cosigned for them.2  
 
 Regarding the student loan in SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant had the same agreement with 
his sister that she was responsible for the repayment of this loan that was taken out in 
approximately 2006. He told the investigator that his sister made regular payments on the 
loan, was never late, and she had paid it off early. He told the investigator that he received 
confirmation in the mail from the creditor in 2009 that the loan was paid. He disputed that 
he owed the loan or that the account was still open. He intended to contact his sister and 
the creditor regarding the status of the account.3  
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 7. 
 
3 Item 7. 
 
3 
 
 
 In Applicant’s August 2015 security clearance application (SCA), he did not 
disclose the two student loans, as was required. The Government alleged in the SOR the 
following:  
 
Section 26-Financial Record Delinquency Involving Routine 
Accounts-Other than previously listed, have any of the following 
happened? In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over 
to a collection agency [and] In the past seven (7) years, you had an 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay 
as agreed: (Include financial obligations for which you wee the sole debtor, 
as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor.” You answered 
“no” to both questions, and thereby deliberately failed to disclose your 
delinquent debts as set forth under paragraphs 1.a and 1.b. above.4  
 
In May 2016, as part of Applicant’s reinvestigation, a government investigator 
interviewed him. During his interview, he was confronted by the investigator with the two 
delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b). He told the investigator he was not aware 
that the accounts were in collection or unpaid. He reiterated that he had cosigned the 
loans for his sister. He could not provide to the investigator any other details about the 
accounts. He intended to look into them and resolve them if necessary.5  
 
 In Applicant’s September 2016 answer to the SOR, he denied he deliberately 
falsified information on his SCA when he failed to disclose the two delinquent student 
loans. He stated:  
 
I feel that I was being truthful when I completed my (e-QIP). I have never 
had are (sic) received any document stating that I had any account in 
collections. The two student loans that I cosigned for I thought was (sic) 
being paid on a monthly basis until the special investigator told me that they 
wasn’t.6  
 
Applicant’s response to both SOR ¶ 1.a and ¶ 1.b was “I admit now.”7 He explained 
in his response that the investigator told him that he had four delinquent student loans. 
Applicant stated that he only had three student loans that he had cosigned. He believed 
the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were being paid monthly. He stated he 
never received notice that the accounts were in collection. He stated that after his 2015 
interview, he contacted his sister and told her the accounts were in collection. She told 
him the loans were being paid. He further stated in his answer to SOR ¶ 1.a: “I am 
presently trying to see if I myself as the cosignor can establish a payment plan and pay 
                                                          
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 3, 4. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 2.  
 
 
4 
 
 
this loan off.”8 His response regarding SOR ¶ 1.b was: “If and when I am able to get 
through to the collection agency[,] I can actually pay this loan off now for the total amount 
$8,796.”9  
 
Applicant’s June 2011 and April 2016 credit reports show both student loan 
accounts are in collection status.10 Applicant did not provide any evidence of his actions 
to resolve the debts after he was confronted with them in 2011 or again in 2015. He did 
not provide a response to the FORM that requested he provide documentary evidence to 
support his proposed actions to resolve these debts.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
8 Item 2. 
 
9 Item 2. 
 
10 Items 2, 5, 6. 
 
11 Item 2.  
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been aware since at least 2011 that two student loans for which he 
cosigned were in collection. He indicated he would contact his sister, and if she could not 
pay them then he would. In 2015, when he was interviewed again and confronted with 
the same delinquent student loans he said he intended to research and resolve them, but 
 
6 
 
 
failed to do so. In his September 2016 answer, he again indicated he would resolve the 
debts. They remain unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant understood as the cosignor of two student loans that he was ultimately 
responsible to pay them. Despite being made aware of their collection status in 2011, and 
his promise to research and resolve them, he failed to do so. In 2015, he was again 
confronted with these debts. He again promised to resolve them, and has not. Applicant’s 
financial issues are ongoing. Based on his past conduct, I cannot find that his behavior is 
unlikely to recur. His failure to address these debts casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was made aware of the delinquent student loans in 2011. He indicated 
he intended to contact his sister and resolve the debts. The evidence does not support 
that his financial problems were largely beyond his control. Despite being made aware of 
the debts in 2011, they remained unpaid. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to show 
he took any action on the debts from 2011 to 2016. He has not acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence of financial counseling and that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or is under control. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that he has initiated and he is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve the debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
Applicant admitted he is responsible for the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) has not been 
raised.  
  
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
In 2011, Applicant was made aware that the two student loans he cosigned were 
in collection status. He stated that he never received any documents regarding their 
status and believed they were being paid or had been paid. He told the investigator that 
he would contact his sister and the creditor regarding the debts. In 2015, he gave a similar 
explanation to the investigator when he was confronted with the same delinquent student 
loans, that is he did not know the accounts were in collection status and unpaid. Applicant 
knew when he completed the SCA that he had the student loans that were in default and 
more than 120 days delinquent. However, the Government did not allege the correct 
paragraph under section 26 of the SCA. There is no evidence that these debts were 
turned over to a collection agency or that they had been charged off, suspended, or 
cancelled for failing to pay them as agreed, as was alleged in the SOR. I find in Applicant’s 
favor under the personal conduct allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old military veteran. Except for a short period of 
unemployment in 2014, he has been steadily employed since he retired from the military 
in 2005. Applicant cosigned student loans for his sister. Despite being aware that they 
were in a collection status and his repeated promises to resolve them, he has not. He did 
not provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. As discussed above, I find in Applicant’s favor 
under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
