 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-07005 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, about her tax issues and other 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2016, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing. On January 24, 2017 Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), including 
 
2 
 
 
documents identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant received the FORM on January 30, 
2017. She was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant’s undated response was received by the Defense 
Office of Hearings & Appeals (DOHA) on March 2, 2017. It was marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. The single document included was marked as AE B. Both exhibits are 
admitted without objection. Applicant did not object to the government’s evidence. The 
SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 2) are the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 
2017.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The AGs 
became effective on June 8, 2017, for all adjudicative decisions on or after that date, and 
they supersede the AGs that Applicant received with the SOR.1 Any changes resulting 
from the implementation of the new AGs did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c through 1.m, and 1.p. She denied ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.o. She provided a narrative explanation, but no documents. Her admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. Her only marriage ended in divorce in 1983. She has six 
grown children and 11 grandchildren. She has worked in the health care industry since at 
least 2000. She has worked in her current position, with a defense contractor, since July 
2014. Before then, she had stopped working for a year (since July 2013), because she 
was helping to care for her daughter, who had been seriously injured in an auto accident. 
In connection with her current employment, she submitted an application for a position of 
public trust in January 2015.2 (Item 2) 
 
 The SOR concerns tax issues (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), other delinquencies (SOR ¶¶ 
1.c through 1.o) and a 2005 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.p). The debts alleged total $19,988. 
The debts are proven by Applicant’s admissions and by credit reports from February 2015 
and August 2015. (Items 5, 6)   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($4,561) and 1.d ($743) are judgments issued against Applicant in 
2005 and 2013, respectively.3 SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($327), 1.f ($334), 1.i ($332), 1.m ($400) and 
1.n ($389) are medical debts in collection. SOR ¶¶ 1.g ($862) and 1.j ($362) are debts in 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available on the DOHA website at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
2 Although Applicant submitted her application in 2015, the case number (12-XXXX) suggests it was 
assigned to DOHA for adjudication in 2012. The reasons for this are unclear, though Applicant may have 
submitted an earlier application that is not part of the record. It could also simply be a clerical error.  
 
3 Item 4 at 11-14 (court records regarding the judgments). 
 
3 
 
 
collection to phone companies. SOR ¶ 1.h ($2,475) is a past-due debt to a utility company. 
SOR ¶ 1.l ($6,425) is a charged-off debt related to an automobile. SOR ¶ 1.o ($789) is a 
collection debt to a bank. Applicant did not address in either her answer or her FORM 
Response what she is doing about resolving these debts. (Item 1; AE A) SOR ¶1.k ($81) 
is a debt in collection to a nutrition company. The debt has been paid. (AE B).  
 
 Applicant also did not address how her debts began, beyond referring to her 
daughter’s medical issues. In her background interview, she indicated that she has 
struggled financially because she raised six children without financial support. She also 
continues to provide financial assistance to her children when needed, which has caused 
her at times to fall behind on her own bills. (Item 3 at 6) 
 
 Applicant stated that her daughter was in an accident requiring treatment in 
intensive care for several weeks, as well as multiple surgeries. She indicated that she 
that she has begun paying her medical debts through a payment plan. (Item 2; AE A).  
 
 Applicant disclosed on her SCA that in tax year 2011, she failed to file a local tax 
return, as required, and that she had owed about $700 in local taxes (which she indicated 
that she paid in 2012, in a payment plan). (Item 2 at 36). In her background interview, she 
indicated that she was notified in 2011 that she owed local taxes for tax years 2006 and 
2007. She indicated that she was not aware that she owed those taxes because she had 
moved. (Item 3 at 3).  
 
 In SOR ¶ 1.a, the government alleged that Applicant filed to file local taxes as 
required in her home state (State 1) for tax years 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2011. Applicant 
admitted the allegation in her answer without further comment.  
 
Applicant was charged under State 1 law with “failing to file [an] annual earned 
income tax return” in the appropriate county or borough in State 1 where she lived for 
several years. In January 2011, she pleaded guilty in State 1 court to charges of failing to 
file an annual tax return in April 2008 and April 2009 (for the previous tax years of 2007 
and 2008, respectively). She entered a similar plea in September 2015 to charges of 
failing to file an annual tax return in April 2011 and April 2012 (for the previous tax years 
of 2010 and 2011, respectively). She paid the taxes owed, which were between $160 and 
$250 each year, plus court costs and penalties. (Item 4 at 1-9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b concerns a $1,908 state tax lien, filed against Applicant in State 1 court 
in January 2009. Applicant denied the allegation, indicating that the lien had been 
satisfied (Item 2). However, the debt is listed on the credit reports the Government 
provided, and the court record provided indicated that, as of July 2016, the lien had not 
been released. (Item 4 at 10; Items 5, 6)  
 
Applicant provided no more recent information about her taxes, and no tax-related 
documents, with her FORM Response. She provided no documentation about her current 
assets, or her monthly income or expenses. She indicated that she will continue to work 
on her credit as best as she can. (AE A) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance,4 or, as here, a 
determination of suitability for a position of public trust. As the Supreme Court noted in 
Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”5 
  
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The financial considerations trustworthiness concern is set out in AG & 18:  
 
                                                          
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
5 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding sensitive 
information.6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and  
 
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant filed bankruptcy in 2005. She later accrued more delinquencies, 
including a tax lien, several judgments, and other delinquencies. She also failed to file her 
local tax returns as required, in 2007, 2008, 2010 and 2011. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(g) 
apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant admitted, both in State 1 court and in her answer to the SOR, that she 
failed to timely file her local tax returns for tax years 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2011. She 
indicated in her background interview this was because she did not receive notice of what 
she owed because she moved. For each tax year at issue, Applicant owed between $160 
and $250. She did not provide copies of any of tax returns, though the court documents 
provided by the Government reflect that the debts were paid (albeit belatedly) during the 
court process. There is also no indication that she has an ongoing problem filing her local 
tax returns, as required. SOR ¶ 1.a is therefore resolved by AG ¶ 20(g). However, 
Applicant did not establish that the $1,908 tax lien at SOR ¶ 1.b has been paid or 
otherwise resolved.  
 
 Applicant filed for bankruptcy 12 years ago, in 2005. While that is part of her full 
financial history, that proceeding is also mitigated by the passage of time. Applicant’s 
more recent financial problems are attributable, at least in part, to her understandable 
efforts to help her children financially – particularly her daughter who was badly injured in 
an auto accident. These were circumstances beyond Applicant’s control. Her own 
finances were negatively affected, as she fell behind on her own bills. The first prong of 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 For full application of AG ¶ 20(b), however, Applicant must provide evidence that 
she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant paid one of her debts (SOR ¶ 
1.k) and began to pay her medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.i, 1.m, and 1.n). These debts 
are being resolved.  
 
 The DOHA Appeal Board has noted that:  
 
An applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying 
off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an 
applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct,’ that 
is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. ISCR Case 
No. 07-06842 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).7 
 
As to her non-medical debts, however, Applicant did not show sufficient evidence 
that she acted responsibly. Chiefly, this is because, with one exception (¶ 1.k) she did not 
sufficiently address or document her efforts or her plans to pay, settle, or otherwise 
resolve any of her nonmedical debts, which remain unresolved. AG ¶ 20(b) does not fully 
apply. For similar reasons, Applicant did not established that she “initiated and is adhering 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009); see also ISCR Case No. 09-08462 at 3 (May 31, 
2011). 
 
 
7 
 
 
to a good-faith effort to repay” her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts, under 
AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
 Applicant provided no documents or specific information concerning her current 
financial situation, such as her assets or her monthly income or expenses. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her 
non-medical debts are significant and remain ongoing. These debts continue to cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
position of public trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Because Applicant requested a determination 
on the written record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate her credibility 
based on demeanor.8 Applicant has begun to resolve her debts, but she does not have a 
reliable financial track record at this time. Her finances remain a trustworthiness concern. 
She did not provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of public 
trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003).  
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to sensitive information. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
