 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )       ISCR Case: 12-11573  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 12, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes approximately $11,700 in delinquent debts and an unpaid 
judgment, which he has not repaid or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not show that his 
financial difficulties are under control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 15, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On September 21, 2015, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 1, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
February 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items, was 
mailed to Applicant, and received by him on March 3, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional 
information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its contents, and did 
not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period he was afforded. The 
case was assigned to me on January 26, 2017. Items 1 through 8 are admitted into the 
record. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and divorced. Applicant has one child. He has worked for  
a Federal contractor since March 2012. Before obtaining this employment he was 
unemployed from November 2011 through March 2012. (Item 3.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
  
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.j, and 
1.k, without reservation. Those admissions are findings of fact. He denied allegations 1.a, 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. (Item 2.) The debts are documented in at least one of the credit bureau 
reports in the record dated May 25, 2012; November 26, 2014; and February 22, 2016. 
(Items 6, 5, and 4.) SOR allegation 1.a is confirmed by an admission in Applicant’s e-QIP. 
(Item 3 at Section 26.) In addition, Department Counsel submitted court records 
concerning two judgments against Applicant (SOR allegations 1.a and 1.h.) (Items 7 and 
8.) 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant denied owing $8,024 for an unpaid judgment to a credit union (CU). 
In his e-QIP Applicant admitted the existence of a debt to this creditor for an automobile 
that was repossessed in 2011, and that he still owed approximately $14,000. Applicant 
stated that the reason he was unable to pay this debt was because, “I lost my job.” (Item 
3 at Section 26.) The most recent credit report in the record, and court records, indicate 
that this judgment was satisfied in April 2015. (Items 4 and 7.) This debt has been 
resolved.  
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted owing $2,031 to a creditor for a past-due debt. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing $1,468 to a creditor for a past-due debt. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
  
 1.d. Applicant admitted owing $482 to a creditor for a past-due medical debt. No 
other information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing $347 to a creditor for a past-due debt. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denied owing $300 to CU for a past-due debt. The most current credit 
report in the record (Item 4) shows that all accounts with CU are either current, satisfied 
judgments, or paid charge-offs. I find that this debt has been resolved. 
 
 1.g. Applicant admitted owing $158 to a creditor for a past-due debt. No other 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant denied owing a judgment to a financial company in the amount of 
$6,279. The most recent credit report in the record, and court records, show that this 
judgment has not been paid. (Items 4 and 8.) The debt is not resolved.  
 
 1.i. Applicant denied owing $3,064 to CU for a past-due debt. The most recent 
credit report in the record (Item 4) shows that all accounts with CU are either current, 
satisfied judgments, or paid charge-offs. I find that this debt has been resolved. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing $171 to a cable company for a past-due debt. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing $812 to a cable company for a past-due debt. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. Applicant did not submit any information concerning his 
current income, expenses, or ability to pay his past-due debts and be financially secure 
going forward. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. 
He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, 
or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been employed since 2012. He has a considerable number of past-
due debts that he has not resolved, including a judgment. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due commercial debt to various creditors in the 
amount of approximately $11,700, including a judgment. Applicant elected not to provide 
any evidence that his situation has improved. Therefore, there is no reasonable basis to 
conclude that such problems will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 
20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that his financial problems were due, in part, to his being 
unemployed for approximately five months in 2011 and 2012. He also stated in Item 3 at 
Section 26 that he was going to file bankruptcy, but submitted no evidence that he has 
done so. Mitigation is not established AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Accordingly, 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate all of his delinquent debt issues. As stated 
above, SOR allegations 1.a, 1.f, and 1.i are found for Applicant. With those exceptions, 
Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe more 
than $11,000 in bad debts, and did not show any plan for resolving that substantial 
indebtedness or otherwise showing that such issues will not recur in the future. The 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence 
creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
