 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11453 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) A security investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant on September 7, 2012. (Item 3, 
Personal Security Investigation (PSI))1 After reviewing the results of the OPM 
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the affirmative findings 
required to issue a security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The dates for the e-QIP and PSI are correct. Applicant was interviewed in 2012 concerning his 
delinquent debts. His initial request for a security clearance was denied pending a more complete 
investigation. Applicant submitted an e-QIP in May 2016 and listed the same financial issues that were 
investigated by OPM in the 2012 investigation.  
 
2 
 
 
On September 30, 2016, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. 
(Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2016, admitting the 16 allegations 
of delinquent student loan debt under Guideline F. He elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on November 30, 2016. (Item 5) Applicant received a 
complete file of relevant material (FORM) on December 6, 2016. He was provided the 
opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the 
case on October 1, 2017.   
 
 While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs) which he made applicable to all covered individuals 
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility 
to hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and 
are effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the PSI (Item 3) was not 
authenticated and could not be considered over his objection. He was further advised 
that he could make any corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it 
clear and accurate, and could object to the admission of the summary as not 
authenticated by a Government witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection 
was raised to the summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that he waived 
any objection to the admissibility of the PSI summary. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM, so he did not raise any objection to consideration of the PSI. Since there is no 
objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the PSI in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is 35 years old. He graduated from high school in May 2000. Applicant 
received a bachelor’s degree in December 2006. After receiving his bachelor’s degree, 
he attended the same college for a master’s degree. He did not remain in school to 
receive a master’s degree. He worked for various companies in various capacities after 
leaving school in 2009 until starting work as a computer engineer for a defense 
 
3 
 
 
contractor in January 2015. He reported only one period of unemployment from August 
to November 2009. Applicant never married and has no children. He submitted a 
security clearance application in 2012. The application was denied pending a further 
background investigation. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated May 10, 2016; Item 3, PSI, dated 
September 12, 2012) 
 
 The SOR alleges and a credit report (Item 4, dated May 19, 2016) confirm 18 
allegations of delinquent student loan debt. The total amount of delinquent debt is over 
$300,000. On the e-QIP, Applicant estimated his private lender student loan debt was in 
excess of $150,000. In the PSI, he estimated the total student loan debt to be in excess 
of $300,000. He told the investigator that the required payments on student loans of this 
amount were in excess of $1,700 monthly. He reported that his income was much less 
than the anticipated monthly payments. He was advised by a financial adviser to let the 
loans go to judgment so only 25% of his income would be garnished to pay the 
judgment. (Item 3, PSI at 3-5) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated he did not assess the potential job 
market and search for employment until after receiving his bachelor’s degree in 2006. 
The result of his evaluation was that he would need a master’s degree. He continued in 
school using student loans. In 2009, before receiving his master’s degree, he no longer 
had the desire to continue his education, so he left school. He did not complete his 
master’s degree even though he received student loans for the degree. He left school 
early to gain employment and start to repay his debts. He initially did not find the 
employment or income he anticipated to start to repay his student loans. He could not 
repay his student loans but he was able to repay some credit cards. On the advice of a 
financial adviser, Applicant chose to let his student loans go to judgment to lower the 
required payments on the student loans. He states that judgments and garnishment 
orders have been granted against him. However, he did not present any documents to 
show that his wages have been garnished or that he made any payments on his student 
loans. (Response to SOR, dated November 3, 2016)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified and sensitive information) 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations 
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. (AG ¶ 18) The 
financial security concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might 
knowingly compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security 
clearance adjudications are based on an evaluation of an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in another aspect of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to meet his financial obligations. 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk inconsistent 
with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is required to manage his or her 
finances in such a way as to meet financial obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Credit reports reveal, and Applicant admits, 
that he incurred significant student loan debts which are reported as delinquent. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the following Financial Considerations Disqualifying 
Conditions security concerns under AG ¶ 19: 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts,  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant received significant student loans without knowing if he could find the 
type of employment with the salary needed to repay those loans. The amount of student 
loan debt without the ability to repay the debt ` raises questions about Applicant’s 
financial responsibility. His financial irresponsibility reveals that he may be unreliable, 
untrustworthy, unconcerned, and careless as to his financial obligations, and raises 
issues about Applicant’s willingness and ability to meet his financial obligations. Once 
the Government has established the adverse financial issue, the Applicant has the 
responsibility to refute or mitigate the issue. 
  
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible sources, such as a non-profit credit counselling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant applied for and accepted 
significant student loans without knowing whether his future employment would enable 
him to reasonably and responsible repay those loans. He even received student loans 
for his master’s degree which he did not complete. His student loans are numerous, 
recent, and not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. He could 
again receive student loans to either complete his master’s degree or pursue further 
course of study. In his response to the SOR, Applicant did not provide sufficient 
information to explain why he incurred delinquent debt and believed he could repay the 
loans. He was advised in the FORM that he needed to provide proof of payment or 
resolution of the debts. He has not documented his plan, if any, to resolve his financial 
problems and his efforts to pay and resolve his delinquent debts. He also did not 
provide information concerning financial counseling. Accordingly, he has not established 
a good-faith effort to pay his debts.  
 
 Applicant has not acted responsibly because he has not provided information on 
his plans to pay his delinquent student loans. There is no clear evidence that he 
understands the significance of his student loan debt and the need for a reasonable and 
responsible plan and steps to resolve his debt problems. His finances are not under 
control. Overall, he has not provided evidence or proof that he acted with reason and 
responsibility towards his finances. His lack of documented actions to resolve his 
financial problems are a strong indication that he may not protect and safeguard 
classified information. In sum, Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate 
financial security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
access to classified information must be an overall common-sense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In requesting an administrative 
determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, he failed to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his financial 
circumstances; to adequately articulate his positions; and to provide facts to mitigate the 
financial security concerns. In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence provided by 
Applicant to establish that he paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, disputed, or 
otherwise resolved his student loan accounts. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantial documents and details to explain his finances.  
 
 Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his finances and a 
consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. His lack of demonstrated financial 
action is a firm indication that he may not adequately safeguard classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not provide sufficient information to mitigate financial security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
