 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-06533 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns about his family connections to 
India under Guideline B, foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under foreign influence. 
The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2015, and requested a decision on the 
written record, in lieu of a hearing. On December 29, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), including documents 
 
2 
 
 
identified as Items 1 through 5, as well as Administrative Notice (AN) documents I 
through XI. Applicant received the FORM on January 17, 2017. He was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM and did not object to the Government’s 
evidence. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 & 2) are the pleadings in the case, and the 
“SOR transmittal letter” (Item 3) is a procedural document not offered for substantive 
purposes. Items 4, 5 and 6 are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
 On October 18, 2017, I e-mailed the parties and re-opened the record to allow 
Applicant the opportunity to submit updated information about his family and property in 
India.1 On October 27, 2017, Applicant submitted updated information, which is marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection.  
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence issued Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These AGs 
apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.2 Any changes 
resulting from the issuance of new AGs did not affect my decision in this case.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
With the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about India. Without objection, I have taken 
administrative notice of certain facts that are supported by source documents from 
official U.S. Government publications. Those facts are summarized in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, concerning his family and property in 
India, with brief comments. His admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He was born in India in 1968. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in India in 1993. He and his wife, who was also born in India, were married there 
in 1998. They immigrated to the United States in 1999. They have lived in the United 
States ever since. They both became United States citizens in August 2013. Their two 
children, ages 16 and 12, were both born in the United States. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant has worked as a systems administrator for a defense contractor in the 
health industry since March 2007. He held a similar position for an earlier employer from 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
2 The June 2017 AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/DIRECTIVE%202017.pdf.  
 
 
3 
 
 
2000 to 2007. In connection with his current position, he submitted an application for a 
public trust position in September 2013, shortly after becoming a U.S. citizen. (Item 4)  
 
  In the SOR, the Government alleged potential trustworthiness concerns due to 
Applicant’s connections with India, specifically his mother (age 67) and sister (age 43) 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b), his wife’s parents, ages 82 and 67 (SOR ¶ 1.c) and a house he 
owns there, valued at about $50,000. (SOR ¶ 1.d) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and sister live in India. He maintains weekly contact with 
them, and visits India every two years. His mother also visits him in the United States, 
and has stayed with him for extended periods. Applicant’s in-laws live in India as well. 
His father-in-law owns a farm. None of these family members have any connection with 
the Indian government. Applicant’s mother and sister live in the family home, which 
Applicant inherited on his father’s death. He plans to sell the home when they are no 
longer living there. He indicated that he could not be influenced due to his ownership of 
this property. (Items 4, 5; AE A) 
 
 Applicant telecommutes from his home. He visits his company’s headquarters, in 
another state, every two months. Applicant and his wife own homes in both locations. 
He estimates that they have a combined value of about $840,000. Their other assets 
include stocks, bank accounts, and a company 401(k) account, with a combined value 
of about $250,000. Applicant and his wife are active volunteers in their local community. 
(AE A) 
 
Republic of India 
 
I have taken administrative notice of the following relevant facts about the 
Republic of India:3 
 
 India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a 
bicameral parliament. The president is the head of state, and the prime 
minister is the head of the government. Recent elections, which were 
regarded by observers to have been conducted freely and fairly,   
included more than 551 million participants.4  
 
 The 2000 and 2008 Annual Reports to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage identified India as being involved in 
economic collection and industrial espionage. As of 2015, India 
                                                          
3 Unless otherwise noted, the administrative notice facts about India are all taken from AN I – XI.   
 
4 See https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/265748.pdf  (U.S. State Department 2016 Human 
Rights Report for India).This report, along with the 2016 State Department Country Report on Terrorism 
(cited below in footnote 5), was published in 2017, before this case was assigned to me for a decision. 
Both reports postdate the previous versions, cited in the FORM. I take administrative notice of certain 
more recent facts referenced in them consistent with my obligation to make assessments based on timely 
information in cases involving foreign influence. 
 
 
4 
 
 
remains on the Office of U.S. Trade Representative’s Priority Watch 
List, based on its history of trademark counterfeiting and copyright 
piracy, and a recognized concern about counterfeit pharmaceuticals 
being produced in India and shipped to the United States.  
 
 A June 2016 summary from the U.S. Department of Justice’s details 
several recent criminal cases involving export and embargo 
enforcement, economic espionage, and theft of trade secrets, involving 
either the government of India or companies and individuals in India.  
 
 Counterterrorism cooperation between India and the United States 
continued to increase in 2016, with both sides committing to deepen 
bilateral engagement against the full spectrum of terrorism threats. 
Indian leadership expressed resolve to redouble efforts, in cooperation 
with the United States and with other like-minded countries, to bring to 
justice the perpetrators of terrorism. India and the United States 
pledged to strengthen cooperation against terrorist threats from groups 
including al-Qa’ida, ISIS, Jaish-e-Mohammad, and Lashkar e-Tayyiba. 
India continued to experience terrorist and insurgent activities. Anti-
Western terrorist groups active in India, some of which are on the U.S. 
government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, include Islamist 
extremist groups such as Jaish-e-Mohammed, and Lashker-e 
Tayyiba.5 
 
 As of 2016, the most significant human rights problems involved police 
and security force abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and 
rape: corruption remained widespread and contributed to ineffective 
responses to crimes, including those against women, children, and 
members of scheduled castes or tribes, and societal violence based on 
gender, religious affiliation, and caste or tribe. Other human rights 
problems included disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, 
arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial detention. A lack of 
accountability for misconduct at all levels of government persisted, 
contributing to widespread impunity.6 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance (or access to 
sensitive information, as is the case here).7 As the Supreme Court noted in Department 
                                                          
5 See https://www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2016/272233.htm#INDIA (U.S. State Department 2016 Country 
Report on Terrorism for India).  
 
6 See U.S. State Department 2016 Human Rights Report for India.  
 
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 
 
 
of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8 
 
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount 
consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the trustworthiness concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
                                                          
8 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to possible, future exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) both require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low 
standard. It denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding [sensitive] information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”9 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Application of Guideline B is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
choices that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.10 Family 
relationships can involve matters of influence or obligation.11 Therefore, Applicant’s 
family ties and property ownership raise trustworthiness concerns that he has the 
burden of persuasion to mitigate.12   
 
Applicant’s mother, sister and in-laws are citizens and residents of India. His 
contact with these family members, either through himself or through his wife, coupled 
with India’s human rights issues, the threat of terrorism there, and India’s history of 
economic collection and industrial espionage, create a “heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” It also creates a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e) are raised by the evidence. Applicant’s 
property interest in his family’s home in India is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(f). 
 
I have analyzed the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate or pressure the individual.  
 
 Applicant and his wife came to the United States in 1999, and have lived here 
ever since. Their two children were born here. Applicant has worked in the United 
States for many years, and has worked for his current employer since 2007. He and his 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-04786 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2003). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 99-0532 at 7 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2000) (When an applicant’s ties in a foreign country 
raise a prima facie concern, the applicant is required to present evidence of rebuttal, extenuation, or 
mitigation sufficient to carry his burden of persuasion that it is “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
to grant or continue a [determination of public trust] on his behalf). 
 
8 
 
 
wife own two homes in the United States, and have several hundred thousand dollars in 
assets here. Applicant and his family are firmly rooted in the United States personally, 
professionally, and financially.  
 
 Applicant remains close to his family in India, is in frequent contact with them, 
and visits regularly, every other year. He owns the family home in India, but intends to 
sell it once his family no longer needs it. Its value pales in comparison to Applicant’s 
assets in the United States. 
 
 I conclude that the trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b) and 7(e), as 
raised by Applicant’s relationships with his mother, sister and in-laws, are mitigated 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b). I conclude that the trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 7(f) 
are mitigated under AG ¶ 8(f).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of public trust by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance or trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. After carefully weighing the evidence, 
both favorable and unfavorable, and considering the whole-person factors set forth in 
AG ¶ 2(d), I find that Applicant mitigated the heightened concerns raised by his family 
and financial connections to India. The record evidence leaves me without questions or 
doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline B, 
foreign influence.  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is granted. 
                                                 
     
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
