                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
      
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )       ADP Case No. 14-00784 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 25, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
  
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office (CHCSPO), 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASDC3I) entered into 
a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provided trustworthiness determinations for 
contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions as defined in DoD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January of 1987. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 30, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On October 4, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DoD), issued an (SOR detailing the trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F regarding Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 21992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 
1, 2006. 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for a public trust 
position is denied.    
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative guidelines, 
effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or after June 8, 
2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative 
guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 52 years old and divorced.  He is employed with a defense contractor 
as a Senior Operations Analyst and is seeking to obtain access to sensitive information 
in connection with this employment. 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government opposes Applicant's request for access to sensitive information 
on the basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following 
findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR: 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant is ineligible for a public trust position 
because he is financially overextended and at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  There are eleven delinquent debts, totaling in excess of $41,000, set 
forth in the SOR.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations under this guideline, except 
1.d., which he is disputing.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Applicant’s credit reports dated 
October 17, 2013 and August 9, 2016, which include information from all three credit 
reporting agencies, reflects that Applicant remains indebted to each of the creditors listed 
in the SOR.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)  Applicant has been working for his current 
employer since August 2006.   
 
Applicant and his wife divorced in January 2010.  He currently pays his former 
spouse both child support and alimony.  Applicant also incurred approximately $41,000 
in delinquent consumer and medical debt he claims derived during the course of his 
marriage.  Applicant claims that he is making payments toward three of the debts, but 
fails to provide documentation to reflect the payments.  The following debts remain owing: 
 
1.a. A judgment was filed against the Applicant in July 2014 in the approximate 
amount of $3,902.  The judgment remains unpaid.  Applicant claims that the debt is in the 
process of repayment by agreement with the debt collector.     
 
1.b.  A debt owed to a creditor for a medical account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $308.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.c.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $3,857.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.d.  A debt owed to a creditor for a medical account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $537.  Applicant denies this debt and claims he disputed it 
because no services were provided. 
 
1.e.  A debt owed to a creditor for a medical account was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $323.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.f.   A debt owed to a creditor for a medical account was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $1,632.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.g.  A debt owed to a bank was placed for collection in the amount of 
approximately $4,189.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.h.  A debt owed to a bank was charged off in the approximate amount of $12,243.  
This debt remains owing.  Applicant claims that the debt is in the process of repayment 
by agreement made with the debt collector. 
 
1.i.  A debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$6,138.  This debt remains owing. 
 
1.j.  A debt owed to a store for an account that was charged off in the approximate 
amount of $2,643.  This debt remains owing.  
 
1.k.  A debt owed to a department store for an account placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $5,528.  This debt remains owing.  Applicant claims that this debt 
is in the process of repayment by agreement made with the debt collector. 
 
Applicant has failed to provide any documentary evidence to show that he has 
started payments toward the debts set forth in allegations 1.a., 1.h., and 1.k., or what the 
current balance of the debts maybe.  He failed to provide documentation to support his 
dispute with the creditor in allegation 1.d.  Furthermore the remaining nine that he admits 
have not been addressed, whatsoever.  
 
 
 
 
 Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines.  
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluation an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust.   
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudication process.  The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.  The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person-
concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision. 
 
A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information.  Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
(See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).)  
 
 
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also 
be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, 
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive 
gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol 
abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is 
at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable 
acts to generate funds.    
 AG ¶ 19 describes five conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; and 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
Applicant went through a divorce in 2010, about seven years ago.  He walked away 
from the marriage with $41,000 in debt.  Since then, he has not shown a pattern of 
financial responsibility.  Although he states that three debts are being paid he has not 
submitted receipts or any other documentation to prove that he has made payments.  
There is insufficient evidence in the record to show that he has made any payments.  
Applicant is excessively indebted and has not paid his debts.  These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns.   
 
 
The guideline includes several conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
It is recognized that circumstances beyond his control, namely, a divorce affected 
his finances.  However, AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide full mitigation here.  Applicant’s 
divorce was in 2010.  Seven years have passed and the debts remain owing.  Applicant 
has provided no documentation to demonstrate that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, nor has he received or is he receiving counseling, and there are no clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control, or that he 
has initiated a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his debts.  There is nothing 
in the record to show that he has done anything effectively to resolve any of the debt.  All 
of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR remain delinquent.  None of the mitigating 
conditions are applicable.  From the evidence in the record, Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  In this case, none of the mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).  The record fails to establish any mitigation of financial trustworthiness 
concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(g). 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a position of trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
has failed to demonstrate that he has taken reasonable and effective action to resolve the 
financial issues in the SOR.  His financial problems continue as there is no evidence that 
they have been resolved.   
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a position of trust.  He has not met his burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as 
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are: 
 
  Paragraph 1:   Against the Applicant. 
       Subpara.    1.a.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.b.  Against the Applicant.   
   Subpara.    1.c.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.d.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.e.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.f.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.g.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.h.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.i.  Against the Applicant.  
   Subpara.    1.j.  Against the Applicant. 
   Subpara.    1.k.  Against the Applicant. 
    
 
     Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a public trust position for the 
Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
