1 
 
 
 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 15-06773 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Curry, Marc E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented persuasive evidence supporting that his delinquent debts are 
being resolved and that his finances are under control. Clearance is granted.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On February 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, explaining why it was unable 
to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for 
him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 6 2016, Applicant answered the SOR allegations, admitting all of the 
allegations except subparagraphs 1.a, 1.j, and 1.k, and   requested a decision based on 
 
2 
 
the administrative record instead of a hearing. On August 1, 2016, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on August 17, 
2016, and filed a response on September 8, 2016. The case was assigned to me on June 
1, 2017. On August 24, 2017, I re-opened the record sua sponte through September 6, 
2017, to allow Applicant to supplement the record with additional documents. On 
September 1, 2017, I extended the record to September 27, 2017, at Applicant’s request. 
Within the time allotted, he submitted eight documents that I incorporated into the record 
as Applicant’s Supplementary Response, Attachments 1 through 8.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Item 4 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) summarizing Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview conducted on May 28, 2014. Such reports are inadmissible without authenticating 
witnesses. Directive ¶ E3.1.20.  Consequently, I have not considered this document in my 
disposition of this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 55-year-old man with one child. He has been married since 2003.  He 
has a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees. He is an engineer who has worked for 
the same employer, a defense contractor, since 2007. He has held a security clearance 
since 1984. (Item 3 at 5-7)  
 
 Applicant has been having periodic financial problems since 2003. These problems 
correspond with the date he married his wife, and were the result of two individuals 
marrying “well into adulthood and joining [their] individual debt obligations,” in addition to 
his wife’s serious medical illness in 2005, and the birth of their daughter in 2007. (Answer 
at 1, 2) Nevertheless, they managed to make ends meet through 2009, when they began 
struggling to pay their mortgage and their line of credit on their home, as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.d. As for the primary mortgage alleged in subparagraph 1.a, 
Applicant sought a loan modification. After a lengthy, four-year process, the bank rejected 
the loan modification. In 2013, the bank initiated foreclosure proceedings, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.a, alleging a $284,405 delinquency. In 2014, the home was foreclosed and 
resold, leaving a deficiency of $43,996.  (Supplementary Answer, Attachment (Att.) 1. That 
year, the bank discharged Applicant’s responsibility for the deficiency, and reported it to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS). (Supplementary Answer, Att. 1) 
 
3 
 
 The holder of the second mortgage of Applicant’s home also foreclosed the 
property, obtaining a judgment for $71,018. In 2016, Applicant negotiated a tolling and 
forbearance agreement with the bank in which the bank agreed to forego legal action, so 
long as Applicant began satisfying the judgment, through $500 in payments beginning in 
March 2016, followed by $200 monthly payments thereafter. (Supplementary Response, 
Att. 2) As of September 16, 2016, Applicant has been complying with the agreement. 
(Response at 6)  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.j. totaling approximately $32,000, constitute delinquent 
credit card accounts owed to the same bank. Applicant contacted the creditor and  
consolidated these accounts. By May 2017, he had satisfied them. (Supplementary 
Response, Att. 3) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c, totaling $16,389, is a debt that Applicant originally incurred with a 
credit union. By September 2017, Applicant had satisfied the debt, but was unable to 
obtain documentary proof. 
 
 Subparagraph 1.e totals $41,309. In September 2017, Applicant contacted the 
creditor to begin settlement negotiations. (Supplementary Response, Att. 6) 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i, collectively totaling approximately $26,000, have 
been assigned to the same collection agent. Applicant has contacted the creditor and is 
negotiating a payment plan. (Supplementary Response, Att. 4) 
 
 Subparagraph 1.g, totaling $11,392, is a credit card debt that has been assigned to 
a collection agent. In September 2017, Applicant’s spouse contacted the creditor and 
arranged a payment plan. (Supplementary Response, Att. 5) Under the plan, Applicant and 
his wife will satisfy the debt through $189 monthly payments. 
 
 Applicant contends that he paid the debts owed to the creditors alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l, totaling approximately $3,500. (Supplementary Response at 2) 
He contacted both creditors for verification, but neither creditor agreed to provide it.  
 
 The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.m is a medical bill totaling $52. It is one of 
several medical bills that Applicant’s wife incurred, related to a hospitalization in 2015, 
collectively totaling $2,850. In September 2017, she contacted the creditor. She satisfied 
the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.m, and will begin paying the remainder in $100 monthly 
increments. (Supplementary Response at 26) 
 
 Applicant and his wife keep a budget. They earmark 20 percent of their monthly 
income toward debt payment. (Response at 2) They have incurred no new debt in 
approximately eight years. (Response at 3) Recently, they retained an attorney whom they 
periodically consult to help manage their debt payment plan. (Response at 3) 
 
 
  
4 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must consider the totality 
of an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet  
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . . .  
 
 Applicant’s delinquencies trigger the application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems stemmed from the challenge of consolidating his finances 
with his wife’s finances after getting married in 2003, together with his wife’s serious illness 
in 2005, and bills related to the birth of their child in 2007. As for their most significant 
financial problem, the 2013 foreclosure of their home, it has since been resold, and the 
deficiency on the first mortgage has been discharged and reported to the IRS. Under an 
agreement that Applicant negotiated with the holder of the second mortgage, he has been 
making payments since March 2016. In addition, he has reduced his indebtedness by 
approximately $50,000, satisfying subparagraphs 1.b through 1.c, and 1.j through 1.m in 
their entirety. As for the remainder of his debts, he is either paying them through payment 
plans, or negotiating payment agreements. 
 
 Applicant and his wife have not incurred any additional credit card debt in eight 
years. They earmark 20 percent of their discretionary income to debt repayment and 
6 
 
consult periodically with an attorney to help them stay on track. Under these 
circumstances, I conclude that all of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Some of the debts that Applicant contends that he paid were not supported by 
documentary evidence. Nevertheless, I found his contentions credible because he provided 
documentary evidence establishing his payments of the majority of the SOR debts. In 
addition, his disclosure of additional medical bills that were not alleged, but which he is 
paying through a payment plan, reflected positively on his credibility. Upon balancing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the context of the whole-person concept, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings f or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Marc E. Curry 
Administrative Judge 
