 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08541 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 6, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On May 3, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (Item 
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 24, 2016.  He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.)  On October 31, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on November 1, 2016, and received by him on 
November 26, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant failed to respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 11, and they were admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He has never married and has no children.  He is 
employed with a defense contractor as a Linguist.   He is seeking to retain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified three delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,000.  Applicant admits to 
each of the delinquent accounts listed in the SOR.    
 
Applicant’s credit reports dated November 13, 2014; and May 5, 2009, confirm 
the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 7 and 8.)  Applicant has been 
working for his current employer since September 2014. (Government Exhibit 3.) 
 
Applicant was born in Baghdad, Iraq.  He became a naturalized United States 
citizen in January 2006.  He and his family fled Iraq in 1991 to avoid persecution for 
their Catholic faith.  The family fled to Syria and applied to the U.N. for refugee status.  
The United States recognized his refugee status and he came to the United States to 
live in 1996.  Applicant has never served in the military.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
From 2009 through 2013 Applicant worked as a linguist for a defense contractor.  
After his linguist position ended in May 2013, Applicant was unemployed for 
approximately six months.  In September 2014, he started working for his current 
 
3 
 
employer and was deployed to Iraq in April 2015. He has been working there since 
then.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
1(a) A judgement was filed against the Applicant in April 2014 in the approximate 
amount of $25,000.  Applicant explained to the investigator during his subject interview 
that he took out a personal loan from a co-worker in the amount of $25,000 so that he 
could help his brother start a business, specifically a market that sells beer and wine.  
The business has not been doing well, and Applicant was unable to repay the loan.  The 
co-worker filed a civil suit against the Applicant to obtain repayment.  (Government 
Exhibit 11.)  A judgment was entered against the Applicant in April 2014.  After the SOR 
was issued, the Plaintiff filed a request to dismiss the writ garnishment on wages, which 
had been imposed by the court to recover payment of the judgment.  The writ indicates 
that the parties had reached a payment agreement on June 17, 2016.  There is no 
evidence in the record as to whether the court approved the payment plan.     
 
 1(b) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $632.  Applicant indicated that this was a medical bill for surgery he had in 
2013.  Applicant believed that his insurance carrier should have paid the debt in full.  
Applicant resolved the debt on September 22, 2016.  He provided a copy of a letter from 
the creditor indicating that the account balance has been resolved.  (Applicant’s Answer 
to SOR.) 
 
 1(c) A delinquent medical account was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $547.  Documentation in the record shows that the account had a zero 
balance on September 23, 2016.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)   
  
Guideline E –Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-OIP) dated November 6, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  In response to Section 26 
concerning his financial record, Applicant was asked if in the past seven years, he has 
had any bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?  He was asked if in the past 
seven years, he has had a judgment entered against him?  He was also asked if in the 
past seven years, he has had a lien placed against his property for filing to pay taxes or 
other debts?  The Applicant answered, “NO” to each of the questions.  (Government 
Exhibit 3.)  Applicant has had bills turned over to collection agencies, and he has also 
had a judgment entered against him.  I do not see that Applicant had a lien filed against 
his property for failing to pay taxes or other debts.  Accordingly, his answer to that 
question was correctly answered.  However, in regard to the other two questions, they 
were answered falsely.  Applicant failed to disclose the three delinquent debts set forth 
above, one of which is a court judgment in response to the appropriate questions.       
 
 Applicant’s claims that when he filled out the application, he made a mistake by 
checking the wrong box.  Applicant had previously completed an earlier security 
clearance application in 2009, which shows that he knows how to reflect his delinquent 
 
4 
 
debts on the application.  (Government Exhibit 9.) I find that he deliberately falsified his 
security clearance application dated November 6, 2014.  He claims that he did disclose 
the judgment against him during his Counterintelligence (CI) interview.  (Government 
Exhibit 10.)  The CI interview occurred in December 2014, about a month after 
Applicant had completed and submitted his security clearance application.  This was not 
the Applicant’s first time filing out the security clearance application.  There is no excuse 
for Applicant’s failure to list his delinquent debts other than the fact that he did not want 
the Government to know about them.     
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant was excessively indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  Applicant 
also has a history of making poor financial decisions.  He has shown that he is willing to 
seek financial assistance by borrowing large sums of money from associates and or co-
workers, not just accredited financial institutions.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good–faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The record shows that about six months after the issuance of the SOR, Applicant 
paid off two of the smaller delinquent debts, specifically those listed in allegations 1.b., 
and 1.c. of the SOR.  He claims that he is making payments to a co-worker to resolve 
the large debt set forth in 1.a.  This remaining debt is a personal loan for $25,000 that 
Applicant borrowed to help his brother open a market.  Applicant could not afford to pay 
the debt and the co-worker obtained a judgment against him.  This is strange, risky, and 
could place Applicant in a vulnerable position for manipulation.  There is insufficient 
information in the record to show why Applicant did not follow the normal course to 
borrow money, which is to borrow the money from an accredited financial institution, 
instead of from his co-worker.  There is also in sufficient information in the record to 
show whether he is paying the judgment; how much he is paying; what the specific 
payment arrangements are and when they will be completed; and whether the payment 
arrangement was been approved by the court.  There are many questions that remain 
unanswered.  There are no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
under control.  AG ¶ 20 (d) does not provide full mitigation here.   
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to disclose the SOR-listed debts on his security clearance 
application that include a judgment, a delinquent consumer account, and a delinquent 
medical account, in response to questions about his financial record on his security 
clearance application.  He clearly knew at the time he completed the application that he 
had delinquent debts that had not been resolved.  He willfully chose not to include them 
 
7 
 
on the e-QIP. He also failed to list the judgment that had been entered against him.  
This behavior indicates questionable judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case.  Applicant intentionally and deliberately attempted to 
conceal material information from the Government regarding his financial record 
because he did not list his delinquent debts on his 2014 security clearance application.   
Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification and 
concealment, nor was he ill advised.  Falsifying material information is a serious 
offense, and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are 
unlikely to recur. He has not provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof 
with respect to his personal conduct. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant began working for 
the Defense Department since 2009, and at that time he first applied for a security 
clearance.  He reapplied for a security clearance when he was hired by his current 
employer in September 2014.  Applicant has not shown that he is financially 
responsible, nor has he shown that he is trustworthy.  He understands that the 
Government relies on the answers to the questions on the application to determine ones 
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant knows the importance of 
answering the questions accurately and truthfully.  Applicant was not honest in 
answering the questions concerning his finances.  By failing to list his delinquent debts 
in response to the questions about his finances, he has not demonstrated that he is 
candid, honest, and/or trustworthy.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s credibility as it would pertain to his eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
Financial Considerations and the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
