                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                     )                                                              
       ---------------------------------------                )      ADP  Case No. 15-02445          
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the trustworthiness concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility to hold
a public trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted, continued,
denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent Directive
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for all
covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified
information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position were established to supercede all
previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Procedures for
administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be governed by DOD
Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the AGs, effective June
8, 2017. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would
not change the decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 27, 2016, and elected to have her case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on July 29, 2016.  She did not supplement the record with objections to
any of the exhibit items in the FORM. Nor did she provide supplemental information
pertaining to her responses.
Summary of Pleadings
Under AG Financial Considerations, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to timely file her
federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009-2011; (b) is indebted to the
Federal Government for delinquent taxes of $6,673 for tax year 2009; (c) is indebted to
her state for delinquent income taxes of $4,495 for tax year 2010; and (d) is indebted to
two consumer creditors for delinquent debts totaling $942. Allegedly, these debts remain
outstanding.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations covered by SOR ¶
1.a, but denied the remaining allegations. She claimed she is working with tax
professionals to resolve her outstanding federal tax issues and has paid all of her state
tax debts in 2015. Further, she claimed she has been in contact with her listed consumer
creditors.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old senior voice/data network analyst for a defense
contractor who seeks eligibility for a public trust position. The allegations covered in the
SOR and admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material
findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in December 1980 and divorced in October 1993. (Item 4) She
has one adult child from this marriage. She earned an associate’s degree in June 1980.
She has never served in the military. 
Since September 2012, Applicant has worked for her current employer. (Item 4) 
Between March 1999 and September 2012, she worked for a number of non-DOD
contractor employers in various assignments. (Item 4) 
2
Applicant’s finances
Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state income tax returns for tax years
2009-2011, as required by law. Because she did not provide reasons or explanations for
not filing her federal and state returns in a timely manner, it is unclear why she failed to
file them timely as required. As an attachment to her answer, she included a letter from
the tax preparer she retained in April 2016. (Item 3) The retainer letter makes no mention
of engaging her preparer to file her 2009-2011 federal and state tax returns, and no
presumptions are warranted that her retained tax preparer filed returns for these tax years
on her behalf. (Item 3) Whether Applicant’s retained tax preparer ever filed her late 2009-
2011 federal and state tax returns is unclear and remains an open question.
In her interview with an investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
in January 2013, she told the investigator that she planned to contact a tax advisor to help
her with the filing of her federal and estate tax returns for tax years 2000-2011 and to
contact federal and state tax authorities to establish payment plans for back taxes owed
for those years. (Item 6) To date, Applicant has provided no documentary evidence of
filing her federal and state returns for the tax years in issue, or paying or otherwise
resolving her listed delinquent federal tax debt (allegedly $6,673) for tax year 2009, and
her listed delinquent state taxes (allegedly $4,495) for tax year 2010. (Items 3-6) Based
on the documentary evidence compiled in the exhibit file, Applicant’s federal and state tax
returns for tax years 2009-2011 remain unfiled, and her owed federal taxes remain unpaid
and unresolved.  
Further, Applicant has not furnished any documentary evidence of her paying or
resolving her two delinquent consumer debts totaling $753. (Items 3-6) By all evidentiary
accounts, these listed consumer debts remain unpaid and unresolved.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A, lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering trustworthiness cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect privacy information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise
a concern about trustworthiness access and may be disqualifying (disqualifying
conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness
concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to
hold a public trust decision should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do
not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of
the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with
App. A,  ¶ 2(c).
3
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, ¶
2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable trustworthiness  risk. The following App A, ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1)
the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of,
other issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling,
mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse of
dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater
risk of having to engage in illegal acts or otherwise questionable acts to
generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a sensitive position may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a sensitive position depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality
of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
4
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
eligibility to hold a public trust position. The required materiality showing, however, does
not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
and related eligibility to hold sensitive positions be clearly consistent with the national
interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance
eligibility. “[Trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s failing to timely file federal
and state tax returns for tax years 2009-2011. Additional trustworthiness concerns are
raised over her (a) accrual of delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2009; (b) accrual of
delinquent state taxes for tax year 2010; and (c) accumulation of two delinquent
consumer accounts. 
Jurisdictional issues
Holding a public trust position involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor in
protecting and guarding personally identifiable information (PII). DOD Manual 5200.02,
which incorporated and canceled DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, covers both critical-
sensitive and non-critical sensitive national security positions for civilian personnel. See
5200.02, ¶ 4.1a(3)(c)3. Positions designated as Category l and Category II automated
data processing positions (ADP) were previously classified as critical-sensitive and non-
critical sensitive positions under DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
Program, (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation), ¶¶ C3.1.2. 1.1.7. Other positions
that did not meet ADP criteria were classified as non-sensitive positions under the
Regulation.
A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Counterintelligence and Security, titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,”
5
covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the Directive was issued on
November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed DOHA to continue to utilize DOD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations for persons
holding sensitive positions (to include those involving ADP I and II positions).  However,
these Directive Type Memorandums (DTMs) are issued only for time-sensitive policy
actions that cannot wait for a Directive of Instruction to be coordinated and published.
While DTMs move through the issuance process faster than other types of issuances,
they are effective for only 180 days from the date signed, while the other issuances are
valid for five years. See DOD Issuances Updated July 2017),  www.esd.whs.mil. There
are no indications that the November 2004 memorandum covering adjudication of
trustworthiness cases was ever extended or renewed.
Definitions for critical-sensitive and non-critical sensitive positions provided in
5200.02, ¶ 4.1a (3)(c) contain descriptions similar to those used to define ADP l and II 
positions under DOD Regulation 5200.2-R.  (32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J)
ADP positions are broken down as follows in 32 C.F.R. § 154.13 and Part 154, App. J):
ADP l (critical-sensitive positions covering the direction, design, and planning of
computer systems) and ADP II (non-critical-sensitive positions covering the design,
operation, and maintenance of computer systems).  Considered together, the ADP I and
II positions covered in DOD Regulation 5200.2-R refine and explain the same critical-
sensitive and non-critical-sensitive positions covered in DOD Manual 5200.02, ¶ 4.1a
(3)(c) and are reconcilable as included positions in 5200.02.  
So, while ADP trustworthiness positions are not expressly identified in DOD
Manual 5200.02, they are implicitly covered as non-critical sensitive positions that
require “access to automated systems that contain active duty, guard, or personally
identifiable information or information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise
protected from disclosure by DOD 5400.11-R. . . “. DOD 5200.02, Sec. 4.1, ¶ 3(c). See
DOD Directive 5220.6 ¶¶ D5(d) and D8. By virtue of the implied retention of ADP
definitions in DOD Manual 5200.02, ADP cases continue to be covered by the process
afforded by DOD 5220.6.  
Financial concerns
         Applicant’s failure to timely file her federal and state income taxes for tax years
2009-2011; her accumulation of delinquent federal taxes for tax year 2009 and
delinquent state taxes for tax year 2010; and her accumulated delinquent consumer
debts collectively warrant the application of four of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of
the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts;” 19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy
debts regardless of the ability to do so,” 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations,” and 19(f), “failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as
required.”
Applicant’s pleading admission with respect to her failure to timely file her federal
tax returns for tax years 2009-2011 negate the need for any independent proof (see
6
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s delinquent federal
tax return filings are fully documented in her OPM summary of interview and create
some judgment issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of a non-critical sensitive  position.
While the principal concern of a non-critical sensitive position holder’s demonstrated
financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust
concerns are implicit in cases involving debt delinquencies.  
Historically, the timing of filing of federal and state tax returns in DOHA
proceedings is critical to an assessment of an applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and
good judgment in following rules and guidelines necessary for those seeking access to
classified information or to holding a sensitive position. See ISCR Case No. 14-06808 at
3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23, 2016); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015)
With respect to Applicant, it is still unclear whether Applicant and her tax preparer
ever filed federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009-2011. A wilful failure to
timely file a federal income tax return, supply information, or pay the taxes due is a
misdemeanor-level federal criminal offense without regard to the existence of any tax
liability and reflects a serious lack of judgment. 26 U.S.C. § 7203. See Spies v. United
States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943); United States v. Walker, 479 F.2d 407 (9  Cir. 1973);th
United States v. McCabe, 416 F.2d 957 *7th Cir. 1969). Addressing tax filing lapses, the
Appeal Board has characterized such filing failures to represent applicant problems with
complying with government rules and systems essential to protecting classified and
sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016);
ISCR Case No. 14-05476 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2002); ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug.
18, 2015). 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence of her filing either her federal or
state tax returns despite afforded opportunities to do so, both before and after the
issuance of the FORM. Without substantiating evidence of her filing her federal and
state tax returns for the 2009-2011 years in issue, and paying or otherwise resolving her
owed federal tax and consumer debts covered in the SOR, conclusions must be drawn 
that she has not completed her tax filing and payment obligations of the listed debts in
the SOR. 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
(internal citations omitted) In Applicant’s case, her lack of demonstrated responsible
efforts in addressing her tax returns for the 2009-2011 years covered in the SOR and
her failure to pay or otherwise resolve her delinquent tax and consumer debts with the
income resources available to her (after promising to do so in her 2013 OPM interview)
preclude her from meeting public trust position eligibility criteria at this time. See ISCR
7
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at
4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
Based on a review of compiled exhibit file, whole-person assessment is
unfavorable to Applicant. She has shown no  progress to date in filing her federal and
state tax returns or in addressing her delinquent federal tax and consumer debts
covered in the SOR.  Her actions reflect a lack of financial responsibility and judgment
and raise unmitigated questions about her trustworthiness, reliability, and ability to
protect privacy information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented information about her (a)
inability to file her federal and state tax returns for the covered years and pay her
delinquent debts, (b) financial history, and (c) financial progress is necessary to mitigate
financial concerns under the financial guideline and consideration of the whole-person
to mitigate trustworthiness concerns. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s federal and state tax filing lapses and debt accruals that she has failed to
pay or resolve to date, Applicant fails to demonstrate enough probative efforts to
mitigate financial concerns. Conclusions are warranted that her finances are in-
sufficiently stabilized at this time to grant her eligibility to hold a public trust position. 
Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a public trust position under
the facts and circumstances of this case is not consistent with the national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:                Against Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
  
10
