 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No.  15-05376 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARINE, Gina L., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 18, 2014. 
On December 9, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006 (2006 AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2016, and requested a decision 
on the record without a hearing. On February 6, 2017, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case and, on February 10, 2017, sent a complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 
through 6. She was given an opportunity to submit a documentary response setting 
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation to the Government’s 
evidence. She received the FORM on February 21, 2017, and did not respond. Items 1 
 
2 
 
and 2 contain the pleadings in the case. Items 3 through 6 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2017. 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG (2017 AG).1 Accordingly, I have 
applied the 2017 AG.2 However, I have also considered the 2006 AG, because they 
were in effect on the date the FORM was completed. I conclude that my decision would 
have been the same under either version. 
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant, age 39, has been married since 1998. She has one child, age 13, and 
one step-child, age 21. After obtaining her high school diploma in 1996, she took some 
college courses. She has been employed by a defense contractor since February 2014. 
This is her first application for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state income tax returns for tax 
years 2009 through 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.g). For those years, she failed to timely pay federal 
income taxes totaling $25,390 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e). For tax years 2009 and 2010, 
she failed to timely pay state income taxes totaling $2,129 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f). She 
filed the delinquent federal and state returns in June 2013. In July 2013, she negotiated 
an installment agreement with the IRS to resolve her delinquent debt. She made timely 
payments per that agreement through at least June 2014.4 Her state tax debt was 
resolved through her tax year 2011 and 2012 refunds.5 The Government relied solely on 
Applicant’s self-reporting of the facts and circumstances, including documents that she 
provided, surrounding her tax issues in support of the related SOR allegations.6   
 
Applicant attributed her failure to timely file her tax returns to an increase in her 
husband’s income from new employment in 2009. They “severely underestimated” how 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a 
“single, common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility 
for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The 
SEAD-4 became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for 
initial or continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DOD policy and standards). 
 
3 Unless otherwise indicated by citation to another part of the record, I extracted these facts from 
Applicant’s SOR answer (Item 2), her SCA (Item 3), and the summary of her 2014 security clearance 
interview (Item 6). Item 6 was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Because Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM and affirmatively waive any objection to Item 6, I will consider only those facts 
in Item 6 that are not adverse to Applicant, unless they are contained in other evidence or based upon her 
admissions in the SOR answer. 
 
4 See also Item 4. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 See also Item 4. 
 
3 
 
that change would affect his IRS paycheck withholdings. They incurred additional tax 
debts for years 2010 through 2012 because they inadvertently failed to take their 
existing tax debt into account when making changes to IRS withholdings in 2010. There 
have been “no additional issues with their taxes” since 2012.7 
 
During her May 2014 security clearance interview, Applicant was confronted with 
two delinquent debts totaling $258, of which she had not been aware. She attributed 
those accounts to having moved several times over the prior few years. She promised 
to immediately investigate and resolve them. Neither appeared on her July 2016 credit 
report, but it did reveal two new medical accounts, in collection status, totaling $2,195 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i). In her SOR answer, Applicant did not address what, if any, efforts 
had been made or any future plan to resolve them. Applicant has not had any financial 
counseling.8 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”9 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”10 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee 
to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
7 Item 4 at 3. 
 
8 See also Item 4 at 3-4. 
 
9 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
10 Egan at 527. 
 
11 EO 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”12 Thus, a 
decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.13 “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”14 The guidelines presume a nexus or 
rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and 
an applicant’s security suitability.15 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.16 An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.17 
  
 An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”18 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”19 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
                                                          
12 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
13 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
14 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
15 See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
16 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 
 
19 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; See also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s failure to timely file state and federal income tax returns and pay state 
and federal income taxes (as required), and two delinquent medical debts establish 
three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy 
debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(f) 
(“failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR have been mitigated by the following 
applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with 
those arrangements. 
 
Before the issuance of the SOR and her security clearance interview, Applicant 
filed her delinquent federal and state tax returns, resolved her state tax debts, and 
initiated action to resolve her federal tax debts. Applicant established a meaningful track 
record of regular and timely payments to the IRS. Given the facts and circumstances 
underlying the tax issues alleged in the SOR, and in light of the responsible manner in 
which she addressed them, I conclude that they are not likely to recur.   
 
 
6 
 
I do not find Applicant’s medical debts to be security significant in light of the 
record as a whole. However, if even they were so deemed, her actions with respect to 
her previous delinquent debts and tax issues demonstrate that she will resolve them, 
assuming that she has not already done so. She is otherwise managing her finances 
responsibly. I have no doubt about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her failure to timely file state and federal income tax returns and pay 
state and federal income taxes, and her failure to pay two medical debts totaling $2,129. 
Accordingly, Applicant has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the amended SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i: For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
Gina L. Marine 
Administrative Judge 
