 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-05298 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented insufficient evidence to establish that he is financially 
responsible and that his financial problems are resolved or under control. The financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 12, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD), on November 23, 2016, issued him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 23, 2016, and requested a decision based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), submitting the 
evidence prompting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
February 2, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on February 9, 2017. He was allowed 
30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide material to refute, 
extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant responded to the FORM with a short 
 
2 
 
 
statement, and submitted no documentary evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
October 1, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included his 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator from 
August 2, 2012. (FORM, Item 6) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered by me, or that he 
could make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it 
accurate. He was told that his failure to respond to the FORM, or to raise any 
objections, could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered by me. Applicant responded to the FORM and raised no objections. I 
admitted the FORM with its proffered evidence and considered it. 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing SOR ¶ 1.h. I 
grant the motion as requested. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted nine of the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1.g, which he 
denied. His admissions to the SOR allegations and in his response to the FORM are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a large federal contractor. He married his 
first spouse in 2003 and divorced in 2005. He married his second spouse in 2008, 
separated in 2011, and divorced in 2012. He has an 8-year-old son and a 19-year-old 
stepson.  
 
Applicant’s employment history indicates that he has been fully employed since 
2001. His current employer, a federal contractor and security clearance sponsor, hired 
him in 2004. He has been working for his current employer as a flight-test engineer 
since 2007. 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2012 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed that he was having trouble filing his 2011 income tax return because of 
“issues related to his impending divorce” (his wife refused to provide him with previous 
year’s tax documents). He claimed he had submitted multiple requests for extensions to 
file to the IRS, which were denied. He alleged he was seeking help from a professional 
tax consultant to resolve his problems. He presented no evidence of contacts with a tax 
professional. 
 
Applicant disclosed that in 2007 he was late paying back his corporate credit 
card due to a “severe breakdown in the travel accounting process.” He later paid the 
debt, which is not alleged in the SOR. Applicant noted in his 2012 SCA that he was 
 
3 
 
 
issued a temporary child support order in February 2012 that required him to make back 
payments to October 2011, which made him be in arrears. He was ordered to pay 
$2,866 in child support. According to the court documents, in 2012, Applicant’s annual 
adjusted gross income was $133,000. 
 
Applicant disclosed that he had a 2008 charged-off motorcycle loan. He 
explained that the motorcycle was damaged by a towing company called in by 
Applicant’s landlord. Both the landlord and the towing company refused to pay for the 
damages to the motorcycle. Applicant failed to explain why he did not continue to pay 
his motorcycle note. (SOR ¶ 1.i) He also disclosed he had a home foreclosed in 2009. 
Applicant bought a home in 2005 using a three-year adjustable rate mortgage (ARM). 
The mortgage rate “skyrocketed” in 2007 and he was unable to pay the mortgage. He 
claimed he attempted several short sales of the property, but the creditor failed to 
cooperate in the process and foreclosed the mortgage. The mortgage is not alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
A government background investigator interviewed Applicant in August 2012. 
During the interview, Applicant claimed he had met with a tax professional to resolve his 
tax problem. Applicant estimated owing $5,000 to the IRS. He presented no evidence of 
his meeting with the tax professional. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed he was unable to satisfy his 
delinquent debts because of the extremely high monthly child support and spousal 
maintenance the court ordered him to pay ($2,866). His ex-wife also was awarded 
Applicant’s savings and retirement accounts. He pled his case to the family court with 
no results. Applicant claimed he was in the process of filing for bankruptcy protection. 
He presented no documentary evidence to support his claim that he was seeking 
bankruptcy protection.  
 
Applicant claimed that he had been financially responsible – that he was “simply 
trying to survive within his financial means while still meeting his child support and 
spousal maintenance obligations.” He averred that every debt listed in the SOR became 
delinquent because of his 2012 divorce.  
 
Applicant noted in his answer to the FORM that he filed his 2011 income tax 
return. He did not indicate when he filed it, but presumably it was in 2016, because he 
claimed he paid $7,700 in back taxes in April 2016. He anticipated that in April 2017, he 
would pay the remaining tax debt of $4,600 with his 2016 tax return. 
 
Applicant claimed to be making progress paying his delinquent debts. He averred 
the speed of his payments is slower than what he would like it to be, but because of the 
excessive child support and alimony payments, his current income was being used for 
rent, utilities, and food. He implied he does not have the money to pay his delinquent 
debts. Applicant noted that the bulk of his debt is from defaulted federal student loans. 
He claimed he was in the process of applying for a student loan rehabilitation program. 
 
4 
 
 
He explained he had a substantial salary increase this year, and anticipates he will be 
able to make the student loan rehabilitation payments.  
 
Applicant presented little evidence about his current financial situation. It is not 
clear whether his income is sufficient to pay for his living expenses, debts, and his 
court-mandated obligations. Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish whether his 
financial problems are resolved or under control. He submitted no documentary 
evidence of contacts with creditors, payment agreements established, or of any 
payments made to resolve his delinquent accounts. 
 
Applicant blamed his divorce for his inability to pay his debts. Notwithstanding, I 
note Applicant had a foreclosed home in 2009, and a charged-off motorcycle loan from 
2008, both before his 2012 divorce. He also presented no documentary evidence of his 
contacts with a bankruptcy attorney, tax attorney, or of his efforts to rehabilitate his 
student loans. Applicant noted that his current work assignment requires him to have a 
clearance, at least until August 2017. He indicated that he would relinquish his 
clearance then. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 
2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
The case will be decided under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective 8 June 2017. 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. Financial distress can also be caused or 
exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of 
personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental health 
conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the written record. AG 
¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; ”(b) unwillingness to satisfy 
debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” The record established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from 
a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
                                            
1 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 None of the financial considerations mitigating conditions are fully raised by the 
facts in this case and they do not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing and recent. His evidence is insufficient to show that his financial 
problems occurred under circumstances unlikely to recur.  
 
 Applicant has at least two SOR debts that were delinquent before his divorce – 
his student loans and the charged-off motorcycle. He provided little explanation 
concerning the reasons why they became delinquent, and he failed to provide a 
reasonable explanation to justify his failure to address or to pay those debts.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce likely contributed to or aggravated his financial situation. 
However, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to establish that he was financially 
responsible. As previously stated, two of his delinquent accounts pre-date his divorce 
and he presented no evidence to show he acted responsibly with respect to them. 
Moreover, he presented little evidence of any good-faith effort to address his SOR debts 
before his divorce, after he submitted his 2012 SCA, or after he was questioned about 
his financial problems during his August 2012 interview.  
 
 Considering the period during which Applicant’s debts have been delinquent, the 
number and amount of the debts, the lack of evidence of payments made, or of any 
efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts, I cannot consider he has been financially 
responsible in his efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. Furthermore, the record is not 
clear about Applicant’s current financial situation, and whether his income is sufficient to 
pay for his living expenses, current debts, and court-mandated obligations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a), 2(d) and 2(f). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed 
under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He presented 
insufficient information to establish that he is financially responsible and that his 
financial problems have been resolved or are under control. The financial 
considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f, 1.i, and 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance to Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
