 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-07239  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 10, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 30, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On April 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2016. He admitted all the allegations of 
the SOR, with explanations, except for an alleged past-due debt related to a foreclosure 
(1.h.), and a small alleged past-due medical debt (1.k.), and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
July 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case, including 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
a complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items. 
Applicant responded to the FORM on August 22, 2016. He did not object to Items 1 
through 6. Applicant also submitted additional information in his FORM response, to 
which Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on June 
5, 2017. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s response to the 
FORM (Response) is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. (Item 3 at page 5.) He is divorced, with two adult 
children. (Item 3 at pages 17 and 20.) Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the 
Great Recession of 2008~2009, as he was “a Real Estate Broker full time.” (Item 2 at 
page 3.) 
 
 1.a., 1.c., and 1.d. Applicant admits to three Federal tax liens (from 2009, 2010 
and 2012) totaling about $67,337. He has an “Installment Agreement” with the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS), by which since at least January of 2015, he had been making 
monthly payments of $490 towards these tax liens. (Item 2 at pages 5 and 7~10, and 
Response at pages 12~31 and 41~44.) In March of 2016, these monthly payments 
increased to $689. (Item 2 at page 5.) This payment history, and installment 
agreements, are evidenced by documentation from the IRS, and from Applicant’s 
banking records. (Item 2 at pages 5 and 7~10, and Response at pages 12~31 and 
41~44.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay these tax linens. 
 
 1.b. Applicant admits to a state tax lien (from 2012) for about $8,030. He has an 
installment agreement with his state, by which since at least July of 2016, he had been 
making monthly payments of $77.68 towards this tax lien. (Response at pages 3~6 and 
33~40.) This payment history, and installment agreement are evidenced by 
documentation from his state’s legal representative, and from Applicant’s banking 
records. (Id.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay this tax lien. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.e., 1.f., 1.i. and 1.k. Applicant admits to three of four past-due medical debts 
totaling about $1,342. He denies one medical debt for $161 (1.k.). In his Response to 
the FORM, Applicant submitted a list of medical bills from the medical provider’s fiscal 
intermediary, with notations to which the Government did not object. By this notation 
Applicant avers that allegation 1.e. was paid in September of 2016, and that he is “trying 
to come to a monthly payment acceptable to both parties” as to the remaining three past 
due debts. I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve these medical 
bills. 
 
 1.g. Applicant admits to a past-due “Education Loan” in the amount of about 
$6,406.1 (GX 6 at page 3.) In his Answer, Applicant avers he is “on a payment plan of 
$77, and in his Response Applicant has documented five payments of $77.68, which 
were made subsequent to the Government’s credit report. (Response at pages 5~9 
from the end.) I find that Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay this student 
loan. 
 
 1.h. and 1.l Applicant’s admits that his home was foreclosed on in February of 
2009, when he had a past-due mortgage balance of $28,908. As a result of this 
foreclosure, the past-due amount was forgiven by the mortgage company, as evidenced 
by a 2010 IRS Form 1099-A. (Response at page 2.) However, the amount forgiven was 
considered income for Applicant for tax purposes; and as such, he is addressing the 
taxes through his $689 monthly installment payments to the IRS, already discussed as 
to allegations 1.a., 1.c., and 1.d., above.  
 
 1.j. Applicant avers that he settled an admitted past-due energy debt alleged to 
be $492. As this debt does not appear on the Government’s most recent April 2016, 
credit report, I find that Applicant resolved this debt.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
                                                 
1 GX 6 is an April 2016 credit report that notes a balance of $15,070, and a past-due amount of $6,406. It 
also notes a monthly payment schedule of $118, with actual payments of $77. 
 
 
4 
 
 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
 
 
5 
 
 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has Federal and state tax liens, and a number of past-due debts. 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant acted responsibly under unforeseen difficult circumstances that were 
completely beyond his control, the 2008~2009 Great Recession, and there are clear 
indications that his financial issues are under control. He has a payment plans as to his 
tax liens and his student loan, and is addressing the remaining past-due debts. The 
record establishes clear mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of 
AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 20(g). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues created by the 
Great Recession. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.l.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
