 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-05180  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2011 and 2015. She resolved 
many of them and has a plan to continue resolving them. Resulting security concerns 
were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility for a security clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
On April 13, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
(AG) effective within the DOD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 5, 2016, and requested her case be decided 
by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On July 20, 
2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy 
of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed to Applicant on 
July 20, 2016, and was received by her on July 18, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant 
that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. In the FORM, 
Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.n. 
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on September 23, 2016, which was outside of 
the 30-day time limit for submitting additional information. She did not object to any of the 
Government’s Items and submitted additional documents, which I marked as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel did not object to her late filing of AE A. On February 
10, 2017, Applicant submitted additional exhibits, which I marked as AE B. Department 
Counsel did not object to AE B. Items 1 through 6, and AE A and AE B, are admitted into 
evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married for 20 years. She has worked for her current 
employer since 2002. She does not hold a security clearance. On November 5, 2014, 
Applicant submitted her first security clearance application (SF-86). (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant stated that her financial issues began between 2011 and 2012, after her 
house foundation had an unexpected leak that lead to costly repairs. She was 
subsequently unable to pay all of her bills and high minimum monthly payments for credit 
cards. (Item 3, Item 4.) In September 2015, Applicant enrolled in a debt settlement 
program (DPS) and began making monthly payments of $150 into the program to help 
resolve her debts. She documented payments from September 2015 through May 2016. 
(Item 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from November 2014 and February 2016, 
the SOR as amended alleged 19 delinquent debts, which included a judgment, and 
unpaid retail stores and credit cards. The debts totaled $54,488 and became delinquent 
between 2011 and 2015. (Item 5, Item 6.)   
 
 Since enrolling in the DPS, Applicant has resolved the following 13 SOR debts 
between April 2016 and January 2017: ¶ 1.a ($7,244); ¶ 1.b ($133); ¶ 1.d ($234); ¶ 1.f 
($315); ¶ 1.h ($400); ¶ 1.i ($258); ¶ 1.j ($212); ¶ 1.k ($85); ¶ 1.l ($215); ¶ 1.o ($226); ¶ 
1.p ($120); ¶ 1.q ($149); and ¶ 1.r ($168). These debts totaled $9,759.2 (AE B.) 
 
 Three debts were removed from Applicant’s credit report because they were 
inaccurately reported as her debts: ¶ 1.e ($1,664); ¶ 1.m ($392); and ¶ 1.s ($18,858), 
                                                 
2 This total represents the amount alleged in the SOR. Some debts were settled for less money than alleged 
and others were settled for more. 
 
 
3 
 
 
which is her husband’s debt. (AE B.) These debts total $20,914. She is continuing to work 
on resolving three SOR debts: ¶ 1.c ($12,623); ¶ 1.g ($3,116); and ¶ 1.t ($8,076). These 
debts total $23,815. (AE B.)  
 
 The DSP advised Applicant to resolve smaller debts first, along with correcting 
inconsistencies listed in her CBR. She is starting to address the remaining three larger 
debts noted above. (AE B.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
4 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns. Two may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts between 2011 and 2015, which she did 
not begin to address until September 2015. Some remain unresolved. These facts 
establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the 
burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 AG ¶ 20 describes five conditions in that could mitigate the security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent between 2011 and 2015. Although many are 
resolved, three large debts remain unresolved. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s financial delinquencies began after she incurred 
an expensive repair for a crack in her house’s foundation, and subsequently was unable 
to stay current on other bills. That was a circumstance beyond her control. Applicant did 
not provide information that she attempted to responsibly manage her debts while they 
were becoming delinquent, which evidence is required to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20 (b). Applicant did not submit evidence that she participated in financial or credit 
counseling with the DSP she hired to resolve debts; however, there are clear indications 
that her financial issues are coming under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Applicant 
made a good-faith effort to resolve 13 of the 19 alleged debts through the DSP since 
September 2015. She continues to work with the DSP to resolve the three largest 
delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant stated that three debts were successfully 
disputed and removed from her credit report. She did not support that assertion with 
evidence, although one large debt allegedly is her husband’s debt. There is insufficient 
evidence to find mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality 
of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
started resolving financial delinquencies in 2015 by working with a DSP. She paid 13 of 
the 19 delinquent debts and disputed 3 other debts. Having addressed those debts, she 
is working on the three remaining large debts. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases, stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates 
that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) 
(‘Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.3 
 
 In this instance, Applicant provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate a 
meaningful track record within the scope of the term defined in the above case. The 
likelihood that financial problems will recur or Applicant will stop resolving the three 
remaining debts is minimal based on her efforts to-date and knowledge that similar 
problems could jeopardize her employment. The potential for pressure, coercion, or 
duress is eliminated by the resolution of many of Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
                                                 
3ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
7 
 
 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. She met her burden to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.t:4  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. National 
security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
4 SOR ¶ 1.n was withdrawn. 
