 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08870 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 14, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 
2017, new AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 11, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). Applicant received it on October 14, 2016. 
 
2 
 
 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 9. Applicant did not provide a response to the 
FORM, object to the Government’s evidence, or submit documents. Items 1 thought 9 are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He graduated from high school in 1996. He married in 
2003 and has two children, ages 11 and 8 years old. He has been employed steadily 
since 2004. He was self-employed from 2005 to 2014. He began working for his present 
employer in November 2014.1  
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 2014 and approximately $42,000 
in debt was discharged in July 2014.2 Applicant disclosed on his security clearance 
application (SCA) that the reason he filed bankruptcy was “lack of funds/work.”3 No other 
amplifying information was provided.4  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2015. He advised 
the investigator that the reason he failed to pay state and federal income taxes was 
because of a lack of funds. He did not elaborate. He told the investigator that he was 
currently making payments, but was not specific as to whether his payments were for the 
state or federal tax lien. He confirmed he filed his state and federal income tax returns for 
tax years 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, but did not pay the taxes owed.5  
 
 Applicant’s home state filed a tax lien against him in February 2013. Applicant 
stated in his answer to the SOR that this lien was paid in November 2015. He did not 
provide supporting documents to show the lien is paid and released.6 
 
 The IRS filed a tax lien against Applicant in August 2015 for $27,259. Applicant 
told the government investigator in July 2015 that he was working with a tax relief firm 
that negotiates delinquent taxes on behalf of the taxpayer. In Applicant’s August 2016 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 7. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 3, 7. 
 
5 I will not consider any derogatory information that was not alleged for disqualifying purposes. I may 
consider it when making a credibility determination, in mitigation, and when analyzing the whole person.  
 
6 Items 2, 8.  
 
3 
 
 
answer to the SOR, he admitted the tax lien is unpaid, and he stated that he was in the 
“process of negotiations with a tax relief company.” He did not provide information about 
the current state of his finances. No other information was provided. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
 
4 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local tax as required. 
 
 Applicant has state and federal tax liens that are unpaid. He had debts discharged 
in bankruptcy in 2014. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant had more than $40,000 in debt discharged in bankruptcy in 2014. He 
has unpaid federal and state tax liens. His financial problems are ongoing and unresolved. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant failed to provide amplifying information regarding the cause of his 
financial problems, other than to state “lack of funds/work.” He failed to pay his federal 
and state taxes for several years, which resulted in tax liens being filed. I am unable to 
determine whether there were conditions that resulted in his financial problems that were 
largely beyond his control, and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
does not apply. Applicant received financial counseling when he filed bankruptcy. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude his financial problems are under control because he 
did not provide evidence that he is paying or in a payment plan to resolve his tax liens. 
He stated he resolved his state tax lien, but did not provide supporting documents. He 
stated that he is working with a tax relief company regarding the federal tax lien, but did 
not provide supporting documents to show he has made progress in resolving this lien. 
There is insufficient evidence to show he has made a good-faith effort to repay or resolve 
these liens. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) has not been raised. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He was self-employed from 2005 to 2014. He has been 
working for his current employer since November 2014. Applicant discharged more than 
$40,000 of debt in bankruptcy in July 2014. He failed to explain the circumstances leading 
to his financial problems beyond stating “lack of funds/work.” He failed to explain why he 
did not pay his state and federal income taxes for numerous tax years, beyond what he 
previously stated, or make payment arrangements at the time with the entities. His 
conduct raises security concerns. Even if Applicant has paid the state tax lien, as he 
stated in his answer, his failure to provide a reasonable explanation for timely complying 
with his legal obligations for numerous years raises serious security concerns. He did not 
provide sufficient evidence in mitigation. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
