 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     --------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-07144 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., and  
Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for 
access to classified information. He met his burden to present sufficient evidence to 
explain and mitigate the foreign influence concern stemming from his family ties to and 
financial interests in India. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on January 28, 2015.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on May 22, 2016, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 1.  
 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2016; he admitted the eight factual 
allegations made in the SOR; and his answer included an eight-page memorandum in 
explanation and supporting documents. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me December 7, 2016. The hearing 
took place as scheduled on February 24, 2017. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on March 3, 2017.  
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old senior software engineer for a federal contractor. He is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time. He has worked for his current employer 
since 2010. He married in 1996, and they have a son who is attending grade school. He 
along with his spouse have lived at the same residence since 2003.  
 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in India. He was awarded a bachelor’s 
degree in engineering electronics and communications from an Indian college of 
engineering in 1990. Wanting to pursue higher education in the United States, he 
applied for and was accepted into a master’s program. He immigrated via a student visa 
to the United States in 1991 when he was 22 years old. He was awarded a master’s 
degree in computer science in 1993. In addition to his studies, he worked as a teaching 
assistant in the university’s physics department.   
 
After completing his master’s degree, Applicant accepted his first job as a 
consultant for a major technology company. He has worked as a senior software 
engineer for various firms since at least 2001. His employment history includes working 
with proprietary information, he understands his obligation to protect such information, 
and he receives regular training from his company concerning handling both classified 
and proprietary information.2 He has never been employed by the Indian government, 
and he has never worked for an Indian-based business.  
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. His current U.S. passport 
was issued to him in 2014. He is no longer a citizen of India and he no longer 
possesses a valid Indian passport, although he does have an Overseas Citizen of India 
Card, which is not a form of dual citizenship. His wife is also a native of India as well as 
a naturalized U.S. citizen. Upon her arrival in the United States, she spent a couple of 
years attending a community college to refresh her skills in computer science. She then 
worked as a software analyst for about five years. Their son, a native-born U.S. citizen, 
was born in 2007. His spouse is now a full-time mother and housewife.   
 
Like most first-generation immigrants, Applicant has family members who are 
citizens of and residents in his country of birth. His father and mother, ages 77 and 68, 
                                                          
2 Tr. 67-68.  
 
 
3 
 
respectively, are both retired and dealing with chronic illnesses.3 His father is a retired 
police officer who was employed by a state while his mother has always been a 
housewife. They support themselves via his father’s pension and an income-generating 
property. They reside in the same home in which Applicant was raised; they live on the 
bottom floor of the home; and his two brothers live on the top floors of the home. 
Applicant speaks with his parents weekly.  
 
Applicant is the middle child of five children with two older sisters and two 
younger brothers. His two sisters are both married with children. They do not work 
outside the home; one brother-in-law is employed as an accountant; and the other 
brother-in-law is a farmer. His two brothers are also married with children. They are in 
business together in the field of private tutoring, assisting high school students in math 
and science. Applicant speaks with his siblings two to four times per year, usually during 
religious holidays, and he sees them when he travels to India. He has not mentioned his 
application for a security clearance to any of his family members living in India.  
 
Based on his marriage, Applicant has a mother-in-law who is a citizen of and 
resident in India. She is a widow and is supported by a pension from her deceased 
husband who worked as a principal of a high school. She is also assisted by two 
daughters and their husbands who live nearby. One of the husbands works in 
manufacturing while the other husband is a businessman working in rental properties.  
 
Applicant has made regular trips to India over the years to visit his family as well 
as for his wedding. In his application, he disclosed travel to India in 2008, 2009, 2010, 
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014. In addition, he and his wife and son travel regularly in the 
United States and national parks are a typical destination.  
 
Applicant has a bank account in India. When he submitted his application, the 
account balance was about $1,500, but now the balance is closed to zero.4 He opened 
the account in conjunction with purchasing residential real estate in India, which is 
described as a villa in the SOR. He also uses the account to obtain spending money 
during his visits to India. In addition to the bank account, Applicant owns about 10,000 
shares of a small publicly-traded technology company on an Indian stock exchange with 
a current market value of about $1,000. In other words, it’s a penny stock. He bought 
the shares when the company was privately held (pre-IPO) to support a college 
classmate who founded the company.  
 
Applicant and his wife bought the villa in 2011, which he describes as a two-level 
single family home with three bedrooms and two bathrooms measuring about 2,000 
square feet. They bought the villa for his parents, thinking a house outside of a crowded 
city would improve their day-to-day living. His parents lived in the villa for about a year 
before returning to their home in the city where it is easier for them to obtain medical 
care. The villa is now used as a rental property managed by his brothers, and Applicant 
                                                          
3 Tr. 47-48.  
 
4 Tr. 55.  
 
 
4 
 
receives no income from the property. His intention is to sell the villa and use the 
proceeds to pay for his son’s college education, which is still several years away. In 
addition to the villa, Applicant owns a parcel of undeveloped land in India. He made the 
purchase of land in about 2005 as an investment which he may sell in the future.  
 
The vast majority of Applicant’s financial assets are in the United States.5 He 
estimates having a net worth of about $1.2 million. Of that, about $1 million (or 83%) is 
located in the United States and consists of financial or investment accounts, home 
equity, and personal property. His financial interests in India, as described above, have 
a combined value of about $200,000. Although his financial interests in India are not 
minor, he stated that the loss of that money would not hurt him financially or otherwise.6 
 
Applicant was businesslike, polite, and respectful during the hearing, and he 
answered questions in an open and honest way. He stated that after living and working 
here for the last 27 years, his loyalty to the United States is unquestionable and that his 
life, along with his wife and son, is in the United States.7 He regularly votes in U.S. 
elections, he has no intention of sending his son to school in India, and he intends to 
retire in the United States.8 I was favorably impressed by Applicant, and I had no 
concerns about his credibility or truthfulness.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.9 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.10 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”11 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
                                                          
5 Exhibits B, B.1, B.2, B.3, B.4, and B.5.  
 
6 Tr. 60.  
 
7 Tr. 40-41.  
 
8 Tr. 37, 43-44, and 60.  
 
9 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
11 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.12 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.13 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.14 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.15 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.16 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.17 
 
 In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of evidence.18 The Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, 
and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.19 
 
Discussion 
 
 The gravamen of the SOR under Guideline B is whether Applicant’s family ties to 
and financial interests in India disqualify him from access to classified information. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,20 the suitability of an applicant may be 
questioned or put into doubt due to foreign contacts and interest. The overall concern is: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
                                                          
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
18 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).  
 
20 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).  
 
 
6 
 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.21 
 
 There are three additional considerations in analyzing the evidence in this case. 
First, in the defense industry, foreign-born engineers and scientists play a critical role in 
developing and implementing new technology, and that technology may be of interest to 
others whose interests are contrary to the United States. Second, most foreign travel is 
for vacation, business, education, or to visit family, which is normal and not by itself a 
security concern. The significance of foreign travel depends upon the country involved 
and the nature of an applicant’s contacts in that country. Third, foreign travel is also 
relevant when it is an indication of the strength of an applicant’s family ties to that 
country. 
 
 Given the evidence of Applicant’s family ties to and financial interests in India, I 
have considered the following disqualifying conditions under Guideline B as most 
pertinent: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and 
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information or technology; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest.  
 
Based on U.S. concerns about (1) economic and industrial espionage, (2) the risk of 
terrorism in India, and (3) human-rights problems in the country, India meets the 
heightened-risk standard in AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶ 7(f). This conclusion is based on the 
facts set forth in Department Counsel’s written request for administrative notice.22 
 
                                                          
21 AG ¶ 6.  
 
22 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s family ties to and financial or property interests in India are sufficient 
to raise a concern under Guideline B. Applicant is a U.S. citizen living and working in 
the United States, but his parents, siblings, and extended family members are citizen-
residents of India. It was apparent that he has feelings of affection or obligation or both 
toward those family member. Likewise, his financial or property interests in India cannot 
fairly be described as minor or trivial, as the total value is about $200,000. In addition, 
his regular travel to India is indicative of the strength of his family ties to India. Taken 
together, these matters are sufficient to justify further review. 
 
 Given the evidence here, I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under Guideline B as most pertinent: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions of activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country, is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, 
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor or the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.  
 
 Applicant has all the signs of being a mature, responsible, and successful 
person. He has lived and worked in the United States since 1991 when he arrived here 
at age 22 to pursue a master’s degree. He is now 49 years old, meaning he has spent 
that last 27 years, nearly all of his adulthood, living and working in the United States. 
His success extends to his financial affairs as shown by a net worth of about $1.2 
million, of which about 17% consists of the villa and undeveloped land in India. Those 
holdings are not unusual and are rather routine and do not present a conflict of interest. 
It is noted that he made both purchases several years ago before he knew he would be 
applying for a security clearance. Moreover, Applicant stated that the loss of his Indian 
properties would not hurt him financially or otherwise. Although he has a large family in 
India, he also has strong family ties to the United States consisting of his spouse and 
his son, who is a native-born U.S. citizen. His ties or contacts with his family in India are 
about what you would expect given his age, financial means, and family circumstances. 
There is nothing out of the ordinary about his family ties to India. 
 
 
8 
 
 This process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every applicant presents 
some risk or concern. Many security clearance cases come down to balancing that risk 
or concern. Here, Applicant has family ties to and financial or property interests in India. 
Such circumstances should not be dismissed or overlooked as fanciful or unrealistic, 
especially in light of the matters the United States views of concern in India. 
Nevertheless, on balance, I am satisfied that the strength of his ties to the United States 
outweigh and overcome his contacts and interests in India, a country that he left 27 
years ago to pursue educational and employment opportunities in the United States. 
This is not a case of “divided allegiance” with an applicant who has one foot in each 
country. In contrary, Applicant appears to be a model immigrant in many ways. Viewing 
the record evidence as a whole, I am confident that Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any potential concern or potential conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. 
interest.  
 
 Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I have no doubts or 
concerns about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to 
protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a 
whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or 
vice versa. I also considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that he 
met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
