 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-04498 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Alleged drug use and personal conduct security concerns were mitigated or 
unsupported by the record evidence. However, Applicant did not present sufficient 
evidence to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On or about March 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA) in connection with a prospective job offer to work as a linguist for the U.S. military 
in Afghanistan. He previously worked for the U.S. military in a similar capacity.  
 
On June 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to relatives in Iraq raised a security 
concern under the foreign influence guideline.1 The SOR also alleges under guidelines G 
and E that Applicant used marijuana in 2014 and failed to report such use on his SCA.  
                                                          
1 The SOR alleges, in part, under Guideline B that Applicant’s familial ties to his sister-in-law (1.e), uncle 
(1.f), and other extended family members (1.g) pose a security concern. Applicant’s relationship and contact 
with these distant foreign relatives is minimal. The nature of his relationship with these distant relatives is 
such that it could not serve as a means to influence him. Thus, these allegations are decided for Applicant 
and will not be further discussed. ISCR Case No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017) (judge’s favorable 
decision supported, in part, by applicant’s lack of a relationship and contact with distant foreign relatives).  
 
2 
 
On March 7, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR. He admitted the allegations 
regarding his close relatives in Iraq and that he used marijuana in 2014. He denied the 
allegation that he deliberately falsified his SCA. He declined the opportunity to present 
his case at a hearing. Instead, he elected to have his case decided on the written record.  
 
 On November 7, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant nine exhibits (Items 1 – 9) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM. With his 
Response, Applicant submitted another copy of his Answer and a new credit report, which 
reflects a favorable credit score. These matters were collectively marked Exhibit A.  
 
 Applicant did not raise an objection to the evidence offered by the Government. 
He did not present any documentary evidence about his past work as a U.S. Government 
(USG) contractor. Beyond the credit report, Applicant also did not provide any 
documentary evidence detailing his professional, personal, and financial ties to the U.S. 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after the Hearing Office received confirmation that Applicant 
remained sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned the case. Without objection, Items 
1 – 9 and Exhibit A are admitted into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq. He obtained a student visa and immigrated to the 
United States in 2006. He then applied for and was granted political asylum in the United 
States. He became a U.S. citizen in 2013. He attended college in the United States from 
2010 to 2012, but did not earn a degree. He is single with no children. He was hired by a 
defense contractor in 2012, and has twice served in Afghanistan as a linguist for U.S. and 
coalition forces. He reports that before deploying to Afghanistan he went through 
counterintelligence (CI) investigations. He also reports that immigration authorities 
conducted their own background investigation before he was granted asylum and in 
connection with his citizenship application. 
 
In approximately February 2015, Applicant again applied to work as a linguist in 
Afghanistan. He states in his Answer that he desires to serve his adopted country, the 
United States, in this fashion because of the deep love he has for this country, which has 
done so much for the Kurdish people in Iraq going back to the early 1990s. He also wants 
to help the Afghan people in their fight against similar forces that have threatened the 
Kurds throughout the years.  
 
On February 12, 2015, Applicant was interviewed by his prospective employer, a 
defense contractor. In response to written questions, Applicant reported that he had a 
number of delinquent debts and he used marijuana twice while in State A, a state that 
has legalized the use of marijuana. He also reported being arrested and convicted in 2014 
for the illegal possession of marijuana. He explained that after leaving State A, he and his 
brother, a defense contractor with a security clearance, were stopped by police for an 
                                                          
2 The information relayed in the fact section is taken from the admitted evidence (Items 1-8 and Exhibit A).  
 
3 
 
alleged traffic violation. The police then searched Applicant’s car and found a marijuana-
laced cookie and an open container of alcohol. He was arrested and pled guilty to the 
drug-related charge, in part, to save his brother from any potential adverse repercussions.  
 
Shortly after the pre-employment screening interview, Applicant submitted an SCA  
in connection with his employment as a linguist. In response to relevant questions, he 
again reported his past-due debts and his arrest and conviction on the marijuana-related 
charge in 2014. He also reported his foreign connections, contacts, and travel. He omitted 
listing his use of marijuana in 2014 in response to a question asking if he had illegally 
used any drugs in the past seven years. He explained during a CI interview, which took 
place on March 9, 2015, that he did not believe he needed to list the marijuana use since 
he had used it in a state where such use was legal.3 
 
During the March 2015 CI interview, Applicant also discussed his relatives in Iraq. 
His parents, two brothers, and a sister are citizens and residents of Iraq. They live in the 
Kurdistan area of Iraq. His parents and siblings have no connection to the Iraqi 
government or other foreign group or entity. Applicant has somewhat regular contact with 
his parents and siblings in Iraq, and provides them with financial support. He admits in 
his Answer that he is somewhat closer to one of his siblings in Iraq than the other two, 
because they worked together for many years. He has provided financial assistance to 
this sibling in the past. He has informed his parents that he is working as an interpreter in 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s relationship to his immediate family members in Iraq and the 
financial support he has provided them are alleged as a potential foreign influence 
security concern at SOR 1.a – 1.d and 1.h.  
 
Administrative Notice - The Republic of Iraq.4 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. Iraq continues to develop as a 
sovereign, stable, and self-reliant country. The U.S. State Department states in its current 
bilateral fact sheet that the outcome of Iraq’s 2014 parliamentary elections generally met 
international standards of free and fair elections, and led to the peaceful transition of 
power. The State Department further states in the current fact sheet that Iraq has 
functioning government institutions including an active legislature, is playing an 
increasingly constructive role in the region, and has a bright economic future as oil 
revenues surpass pre-Saddam production levels with continued rapid growth to come.  
 
The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq marked a milestone in the 
U.S.-Iraqi relationship. Iraq is now a key partner of the United States. The U.S. maintains 
vigorous and broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and security 
issues in accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement.  
                                                          
3 The SOR alleges that Applicant submitted his SCA “on or about February 23, 2015,” however, the only 
date on the SCA submitted with the FORM (Item 3) is March 9, 2015 – the same day as the CI interview. 
Whether Applicant submitted the SCA on February 23rd or March 9th is immaterial to my analysis and finding.  
 
4 See generally Item 9, as updated by current information contained in Appellate Exhibit I (publically-
available U.S. State Department documents). 
 
4 
 
The U.S. State Department notes in its most recent human rights report that civilian 
authorities were not always able to maintain effective control of all security forces 
operating within Iraq. Furthermore, violence continued to divide the country and severe 
human rights problems were widespread. 
 
The State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq because of 
continued instability and threats against U.S. citizens. Travel within Iraq remains very 
dangerous, and the ability of the U.S. embassy to assist U.S. citizens facing difficulty is 
extremely limited. U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. 
Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may also threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. The U.S. 
government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. government 
personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under strict 
security guidelines. 
 
Recent U.S. State Department press releases recount the successes of and 
congratulate Iraqi security forces and Kurdish Peshmerga against ISIS, to include the 
recent liberation of Mosul. A press release on October 17, 2017, notes U.S. concerns 
over recent reports of clashes near disputed areas near Kirkuk, as follows:  
 
In order to avoid any misunderstandings or further clashes, we urge the 
central government to calm the situation by limiting federal forces’ 
movements in disputed areas to only those coordinated with the Kurdistan 
Regional Government. We are encouraged by Prime Minister Abadi’s 
instructions to federal forces to protect Iraqi Kurdish citizens and to not 
provoke conflict. The reassertion of federal authority over disputed areas in 
no way changes their status – they remain disputed until their status is 
resolved in accordance with the Iraqi constitution. Until parties reach a 
resolution, we urge them to fully coordinate security and administration of 
these areas. To that end, all parties should engage in dialogue now on the 
basis of the Iraqi constitution, as Prime Minister Abadi offered and the 
Kurdistan Regional Government accepted publicly. The United States 
remains committed to a united, stable, democratic, and federal Iraq, and 
committed to the Kurdistan Regional Government as an integral component 
of the country. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
 
 
5 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.5 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
                                                          
5 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
6 
 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 Individuals are not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing a person’s 
potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign country involved, 
the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.6  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
                                                          
6 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors 
an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”7 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.8 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate, such an applicant faces a 
very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their connections to and 
contacts with foreign relatives.9 
 
 Here, Applicant’s relationship to his parents and siblings residing in Iraq is not 
casual. Notwithstanding recent successes against ISIS, Iraq remains a dangerous 
country and it is far from a mere hypothetical concern that anti-U.S. elements could 
attempt to influence Applicant through his family members in Iraq. Although Applicant 
faced the same risks when he previously volunteered to work as a USG contractor, he 
provided insufficient evidence from which I could draw a favorable conclusion about the 
above-listed mitigating conditions and his current security clearance eligibility. Of note, 
the record contains no evidence about his past work for the U.S. military, including 
whether he had access to sensitive U.S. information and how he handled such 
information.10 Also, there is limited information in the record regarding his current 
relationship with his parents and siblings in Iraq, and about his present ties to the United 
States. In light of the heightened security concerns and the limited evidentiary record, I 
find that foreign influence security concerns remain.11  
 
However, this adverse security assessment is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people may act in 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
10 A judge should obviously consider an applicant’s service as a translator in weighing security concerns. 
However, such evidence is not dispositive in any given case. See ISCR Case No. 12-08823 at 3 (App. Bd. 
May 6, 2016) (in upholding favorable decision, the Appeal Board noted that judge’s findings about 
applicant’s “cooperation with the U.S and the considerable hardship and danger he faced as a result of that 
cooperation” was fully supported by the record evidence).  
 
11 In reaching this adverse conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept, including the favorable 
inferences to be drawn from Applicant’s work as a defense contractor in a combat zone. See generally AG 
¶ 2. I also considered that Applicant’s brother, who presumably would have similar familial ties to Iraq, was 
reportedly granted a security clearance. However, each case must be decided on its own merits. 
Furthermore, I am not privy as to what evidence applicant’s brother presented in mitigating the heightened 
security concerns raised by his familial ties to Iraq.  
 
8 
 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such 
as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The use of marijuana by a prospective or active clearance holder raises concerns 
about the person’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. See AG ¶ 24. The record evidence reflects that 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was an aberrational event that occurred over three years 
ago and has not since been repeated. Applicant now clearly understands that such drug 
use, even in a state or a foreign country that has legalized the use of marijuana, remains 
a security concern for the federal government and could result in the denial or revocation 
of a security clearance. Based on the record evidence, it is unlikely that similar security-
significant conduct will recur. See AG ¶ 26(a). Accordingly, I find that Applicant met his 
burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating the Guideline H security concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security clearance process relies on the honesty and candor of all applicants. 
It generally begins with the answers provided by an applicant in the security clearance 
application and continues throughout the investigative and adjudicative stages of the 
security clearance process. An applicant who deliberately omits or misrepresents material 
facts during the clearance process exhibits conduct inconsistent with the judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness expected from all prospective and active clearance holders. 
See AG ¶ 15. See also SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(i). However, the omission of material 
information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant committed a 
deliberate falsification.  
 
 The facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s failure to list his past 
marijuana use on the SCA show that it was not deliberate. First, Applicant revealed this 
information to his employer, a major defense contractor, during his pre-employment 
screening. This interview took place before Applicant submitted his SCA. Second, 
Applicant’s explanation for not listing his marijuana use was logical, reasonable, and fully 
consistent with the record evidence. The relevant question on the SCA asked Applicant 
about past “illegal drug use.” Applicant’s marijuana use was legal under state law. 
Furthermore, he volunteered the information about his past marijuana use in response to 
a written question on the prescreening employment application, which did not contain the 
limiting language contained in the SCA. Third, Applicant’s disclosures of other material 
information on the SCA and candor during the course of the ensuing investigation, which 
took place almost immediately after he submitted the SCA, fully demonstrate that he was 
not attempting to hide or mislead the Government about his past marijuana use.  
 
In short, the record is replete with evidence that Applicant was not attempting to 
hide or misrepresent his past drug use. He did not intend to falsify his SCA when he 
omitted the information about his past marijuana use. The Government failed to meet its 
burden of proof.  
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d, 1.h:         Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.g:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.12 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 In light of Applicant’s past work as a linguist  and the obvious need of the DoD for persons with such 
skills, I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. However, the applicability of this 
Appendix to contractor cases adjudicated under the Directive remains a question. Furthermore, even if 
applicable, no implementation guidance has been issued. Thus, it would be inappropriate for a judge to 
issue a ruling on this issue at this time.  
