 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05886 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has spent 
most of his career living and working abroad. He has mitigated the security concerns 
raised by his foreign-based assets and his friendships with individuals who are citizens 
and residents of Ukraine. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable 
to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the written 
record. The Government submitted its case, called File of Relevant Material (FORM), to 
Applicant on June 1, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on June 18, 2016, and 
provided a response. The documents offered by the Government are admitted to the 
record as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. The document offered by Applicant 
is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Ukraine. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant 
facts are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 61, is an accountant. Since approximately November 2004, he has 
worked in the international development sector. He has worked on contracts in the 
Middle East, South Asia, and Africa. Applicant has applied for a security clearance, his 
first, in anticipation of a project in South Asia.  On his security clearance application and 
in his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided detailed disclosures about his work 
history, foreign assets, and foreign contacts. 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth. He grew up in the United States, completing 
his education and obtaining his professional certification. Applicant started his career in 
the corporate sector, which led him to Germany in 1986 where he lived and worked in 
executive-level positions for the next 15 years. He opened a German-based bank 
account. In 1990, Applicant purchased a home in a German city with a large U.S. 
military presence and large population of U.S. citizens. Working and residing in 
Germany, Applicant complied with laws regarding taxation and compulsory contributions 
to the social security system. Since 1979, the United States and Germany have had an 
agreement regarding social security benefits, improving social security protection for 
individuals who have worked in both countries. As a U.S. citizen working in Germany for 
                                                          
2 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE III. 
  
 
3 
 
more than five years, Applicant is entitled to receive benefits from the German social 
security system.3  
 
At the time Applicant completed his security clearance application, he disclosed 
that his German bank account contained over $730,000. In his SOR answer, Applicant 
explained that for the last 15 years, 70% of this balance has been held in financial 
securities including money markets, certificates of deposit, and mutual funds that have 
performed well over the years. Also, he has very low living expenses while working on 
international development projects, allowing him to save the majority of his salary. 
Applicant’s home in Germany is worth approximately $190,000. The property remains 
empty when Applicant is not resting there between international assignments.  
 
 In February 2004, Applicant’s employment led to a collaboration between his 
U.S.-based company and an entity in Ukraine. The government of the Ukraine is 
currently embroiled in conflicts with separatist groups for control over certain areas of 
the country and with Russia over its annexation of the Crimean Peninsula. While the 
elected government controls most of the country, separatists have gained control over 
areas in the eastern region of the country. Through work, Applicant became friends with 
a woman, a citizen and resident of Ukraine, who worked with him as a translator. Over 
time, Applicant came to know the woman’s sister, who works for a travel company, and 
brother-in-law, who works for a business school.   
 
Over the years, Applicant has maintained contact with the woman, who now 
works for a Danish company that imports water pumps, and with her family members. 
He visits them in the Ukraine annually as his schedule permits. The U.S. State 
Department advises U.S. citizens to avoid separatist-controlled areas of the Ukraine, 
where separatist groups have detained and kidnapped U.S. citizens. Applicant’s friends 
live and work in Ukraine’s capital city, which is controlled by the government. The 
capital is nearly 1,000 kilometers away from the separatist-controlled areas. While the 
Ukrainian government has committed human-rights violations against its citizens, the 
focus appears to be on political dissidents. The record does not contain any evidence to 
suggest that Applicant’s friends are involved in any political activity. There is no 
evidence that Applicant travels to separatist-controlled areas or the Crimea Peninsula.  
 
 When not working overseas, Applicant resides in a property he owns jointly with 
his brother in the United States, which he considers home. Applicant maintains all of his 
medical relationships in the United States. In addition to his German-based assets, 
Applicant has retirement savings in the United States from his jobs with U.S. 
companies.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
3 https://www.ssa.gov/international/Agreement_Pamphlets/germany.html 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
  
 “[F]oreign contacts and interests, including . . . financial and property interests, 
are a national security concern if they result in a divided allegiance [or] . . . may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in 
a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by any foreign interest.” Applicant maintains close relationships with individuals 
who are residents and citizens of Ukraine. Given the ongoing conflicts in Ukraine, 
between the elected government and separatist groups and the potential threats against 
 
5 
 
U.S. citizens, Applicant’s relationships and presence in the country creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.4  Also, Applicant’s $900,000 in German-based assets are substantial and 
could subject him to a heighted risk of foreign inducement or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest.5  
 
 However, the evidence in the record mitigates the concerns about Applicant’s 
ongoing friendships with three Ukrainian nationals. Applicant’s Ukrainian friends are not 
involved in professions or activities that are likely to place Applicant in a position of 
having to choose between foreign interests and U.S. interests.6   Furthermore, there is 
no indication that Applicant travels to areas in the Ukraine that increase his exposure to 
separatist groups that may have anti-American sentiments. The concerns raised by 
Applicant’s German-based assets are also mitigated. Applicant accumulated these 
assets in the normal course of professional life lived abroad. His German-based assets 
are maintained as a convenience, not as an act of foreign preference. Given the long 
standing relationship between Germany and the United States, it is unlikely that 
Applicant’s financial interests in that country will result in a conflict of interest. 
Furthermore, it is unlikely that the German government or entities operating in that 
country will use Applicant’s financial assets as tools to effectively influence, manipulate, 
or pressure Applicant.7 
 
 Applicant’s entitlement to social security benefits from the German government 
are not disqualifying as his coverage by and contributions to the system are in 
compliance with an agreement between the United States and Germany. 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the whole-
person factors in AG ¶ 2(d). In mitigating the foreign influence concerns, Applicant has 
demonstrated that he understands the importance of disclosing foreign contacts and 
financial interests. During this adjudication, Applicant has disclosed, in detail, his foreign 
contacts, assets, and work history. I am satisfied that he will continue to handle these 
reporting requirements properly as a clearance holder. 
                                                          
4 AG ¶ 7(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign . . . friend . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. 
 
5 AG ¶ 7(f) substantial . . . financial, or property interests in a foreign country . . . that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign inducement or exploitation, or personal conflict of interest. 
 
6 AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or, the position or activities of those persons in that country are such that is unlikely the individual 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interest of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States.  
 
7 AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interest is such that 
they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used to effectively influence, manipulate, or 
pressure the individual.  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
