 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-06927 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 25, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 17, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On June 8, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on June 29, 2016, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
August 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. A 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 6, was 
provided to Applicant, who received the file on September 12, 2016.1  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on July 11, 2017. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions2 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 and married with three children. He has been employed by a 
defense contractor since December 2012 and seeks to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment. He served on active duty with the Navy from 1992 
through August 2012, retiring as a Yeoman First Class (E-6). He was unemployed from 
the time he left the Navy until he started work with his current employer. (Item 3 at 
Sections 13A, 16, 17.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted six Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on May 5, 2015, and June 30, 2015. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of 
Investigation (ROI) summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an 
authenticating witness.  
 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant denied all the allegations in the SOR under this Paragraph. The total 
amount of money Applicant allegedly owes on those debts is approximately $10,000. 
The existence and amount of the debts is supported by credit reports dated December 
31, 2014; and March 15, 2016. (Items 5 and 6.) The status of the debts as of March 15, 
2016, is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant denied owing a creditor $478 for a charged-off account. Items 5 
and 6 both show this account as delinquent, indicating no payment was made after July 
2011. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denied owing a creditor $479 for a past-due account. Items 5 and 
6 both show this account as delinquent, indicating no payment was made after July 
2012. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.c. Applicant denied owing a cable provider $347 for a past-due account. Item 5 
shows this account as delinquent, indicating the last activity on the account was in July 
2012. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied having a charged-off account with a creditor. Items 5 and 6 
both show this account, but do not indicate any past-due or charged-off amount. No 
further information was provided. Based on the available information, I find that the 
Government has not proved this allegation. It is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,491 for a past-due account. Item 5 
shows this account as delinquent, indicating the last activity on the account was in 
February 2009. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denied owing a medical creditor $146 for a past-due account. Items 
5 and 6 both show this account as delinquent since October 2012. No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.g. Applicant denied owing a creditor $409 for a past-due account. Items 5 and 
6 both show this account as delinquent since May 2012. No further information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant denied owing a creditor $2,788 for a past-due account. Item 5 
shows this account as delinquent, indicating the last activity on the account was in 
November 2008. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.i. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,026 for a past-due account. Items 5 and 
6 both show this account as delinquent, indicating the first delinquency was in 
September 2011. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 1.j. Applicant denied owing a creditor $615 for a charged-off account. Items 5 
and 6 both show this account as delinquent, indicating no payment was made after 
June 2014. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.k. Applicant denied owing a creditor $341 for a past-due account. Items 5 and 6 
both show this account as delinquent. No further information was provided. This debt is 
not resolved. 
 
 1.l. Applicant denied having a charged-off account with a creditor. Item 6 shows 
this account as charged off in the amount of $88, and that the debt was “Transfer/Sold.” 
No further information was provided. I find that a debt existed with this creditor, and that 
it is not resolved. 
 
 1.m. Applicant denied owing a creditor $46 for a past-due account. Item 5 shows 
this account as delinquent, indicating that the last activity was in December 2009. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.n. Applicant denied owing a creditor $1,819 for a past-due account. Item 5 
shows this account as delinquent. No further information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 Applicant elected not to respond to the FORM. He submitted no financial 
information, such as a budget, from which to make a conclusion that he is now 
financially stable. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in conduct that shows questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
Applicant denied both allegations under this paragraph. 
 
 2.a. Applicant filled out his e-QIP on December 17, 2014. (Item 3.) Section 26 of 
the e-QIP concerns Applicant’s financial record. One of the subsections under that 
section is entitled, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts.” Applicant was asked 
whether, in the seven years preceding that date, he had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, charged off or cancelled; 
and whether he had been 120 days delinquent on a debt, or whether he was currently 
120 days delinquent on a debt. Applicant responded, “No,” to this question. This was a 
false response. Applicant had delinquent debts that were in collection, as set forth under 
Paragraph 1, above, which fit the question. 
 
 2.b. Applicant was interviewed by a DoD authorized investigator on May 5, 2015. 
During this interview, it is alleged Applicant falsified material facts by confirming his, 
“No,” responses as set forth under allegation 2.a, above. The investigator prepared a 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
ROI, which was the investigator’s interpretation of what the Applicant said during the 
interview. As stated under footnote 1, above, Applicant did not certify the accuracy or 
truth of the ROI.   
 
 Applicant denied both these allegations without elaboration in his Answer, and 
also elected not to respond to the FORM. For the sake of discussion, the following is a 
quotation from Item 4 at pages 5 and 6, “After subject [Applicant] confirmed the financial 
record information on the case papers, Subject was informed that during the course of 
the investigation that information was found that he had delinquent financial accounts; . 
. . Subject did not list the delinquent financial accounts on the case papers due to not 
having knowledge or paying off some of the accounts that were found during the course 
of the investigation.” 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant, based on documentary evidence, had thirteen delinquent accounts 
that he could not or chose not to resolve. Allegation 1.d was found for Applicant. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence does not establish that any of the above mitigating conditions apply 
to Applicant. He failed to submit any evidence that would tend to support any of them. 
Applicant had about six months of unemployment after he left the Navy, but did not 
submit any information showing how that period of unemployment affected his finances, 
or what he has done since that time to rectify the situation. There is no basis for me to 
find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns of his financial situation. 
Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his e-QIP and subsequent 
interview, the following disqualifying conditions could apply under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP. When a falsification allegation 
is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing 
alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.3  
 
 In this case, there is insufficient evidence in the record to prove Applicant had a 
specific intent to falsify his questionnaire. Even assuming Item 4 was admissible, the 
agent’s rendition of Applicant’s statements at the interview are simply too vague to 
make a finding that Applicant made an intentional false statement then, or on his 
questionnaire. There is virtually no other evidence as to these allegations, since both 
parties elected not to request a hearing. Paragraph 2 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility was 
recent, voluntary, and occurred when he was a mature adult. Rehabilitation was not 
demonstrated, nor was unlikelihood of recurrence. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
