 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-07879 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 31, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 31, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On September 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective 
within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 13, 2016.  He requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.)  
On November 16, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on November 21, 2016, and received by him on December 2, 2016. 
The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
 
2 
 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM. Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 11, and they are admitted into evidence.   
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. He is divorced with two grown children.  He has some 
college and is employed with a defense contractor as an electronics technician.   
Applicant is a veteran, and served in the Air National Guard from May 1991 to 
November 2012.  He is applying for a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified four debts totaling approximately $1,500, and he failed to file both state and 
Federal taxes from 2009 through 2012.  Applicant admits to each of the allegations set 
forth under this guideline in in the SOR.   
 
Credit Reports of Applicant dated April 29, 2008; August 29, 2014; August 11, 
2016; and August 22, 2016, confirm the indebtedness listed in the SOR.  (Government 
Exhibits 6, 7, 8 and 9.)  Applicant began working for his current employer in 1996. 
 
He states that he was going through a divorce when he incurred the delinquent 
debts and failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns.  During his interview in 
June 2015, Applicant stated that he was in contact with the taxing authorities and 
intended to file all of his past-due income tax returns in July 2015.  In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant explained that he had difficulty paying his existing bills while also trying 
to pay child support of $500 per child, two times a month, as well as spousal support.  
He states that he has now made the appropriate financial adjustments, and is trying to 
pay off his debts and his delinquent taxes.  (Government Exhibit 1.) 
 
3 
 
 
 
1(a) Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income taxes as required for tax 
years 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012.  There is no evidence in the record indicating that 
Applicant has filed any of the tax returns in question.   
 
The following debts became owing and remain outstanding:  
 
 1(b) A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$834.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.)     
 
 1(c) A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount of 
$143.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
 1(d) A delinquent account was placed for collection the approximate amount of 
$323.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.)   
 
 1(e) A delinquent account was placed for collection in the approximate amount of  
$26.  The account remains owing.  (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 There is no evidence in the record, including documentation, to show how 
Applicant incurred these debts, what if any financial arrangements have been made with 
any of his creditors, or if he has paid off any of his debts.  It is unknown if Applicant 
engaged in irresponsible spending, or if he simply did not earn enough money to cover 
his necessary living expenses.  There is also no real explanation as to why he did not 
file his Federal and state income taxes for tax years 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012.  Thus, 
each of the debts listed in the SOR continue to remain delinquent and owing.  Additional 
documentation relating to any debt repayments plan with his creditors, his current 
financial state of affairs, as well as any budgets in place, could have been helpful to 
show that some effort had been made.  The record is void of mitigation.     
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Applicant also admits to a history of alcohol abuse, that includes two criminal 
convictions for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol.  Following his second DUI, he 
was diagnosed as alcohol dependent.    
 
Applicant began using alcohol at the young age of fifteen.  He usually drank four 
beers per setting, three times a week with friends at social gatherings.  Alcohol makes 
him feel relaxed, and he believes that it takes about ten beers before he becomes 
intoxicated.  This pattern of drinking has continued over the years.  (Government Exhibit 
5.) 
 
In February 2009, Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence.  He 
pled no contest and was found guilty.  Four years later, in September 2013, he was 
arrested and charged with Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant 
(OVUII) and Reckless Driving.  (Government Exhibit 10.)  Applicant was attending a 
 
4 
 
social function and had consumed between 10 and 12 beers over the course of five 
hours.  Applicant felt safe to drive.  An-off duty police officer reported the Applicant’s 
vehicle swerving.  The police officer who pulled Applicant over smelled alcohol on 
Applicant’s breath, and administered a Breathalyzer exam, which Applicant failed.  
Applicant later appeared in court, pled no contest, and was found guilty.  He was fined 
$962, and mandated to complete 240 hours of community service and to complete a 12 
week alcohol counseling class.  It was following this arrest when Applicant was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence.  Applicant states that since his diagnosis in 2013, 
he has gone to counseling and has reduced the amount of alcohol he normally 
consumes.  He states that he rarely if ever now consumes alcohol.  He states that he 
does not drink anything harder than a beer or two, and he does not go out as much as 
he used to.  (Government Exhibit 1.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant admits that he made serious errors in judgment with his two arrests 
and convictions for Driving Under the Influence in 2009, and again in 2013.  He states 
that he has now paid all of the fines imposed against him and has completed all of the 
other court mandated conditions.  (Government Exhibit 1.)   
 
 In March 2014, Applicant was charged with Criminal Contempt of Court for 
disobeying a court mandate.  Applicant failed to complete the 240 hours of community 
service mandated by the court, as a result of his arrest and conviction in 2013.  
Applicant appeared in court, and pled guilty to the offense.  Applicant was fined $330 
and placed on probation for one year.  Upon completion of the terms and conditions 
imposed by the court, Applicant received a letter indicating that the charges against him 
were dismissed.  (Government Exhibit 11.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
6 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant is indebted to the creditors listed in the SOR.  He has failed to prove 
that he has done anything to resolve the debts, or that he has filed the income tax 
returns in question. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant states that he has now adjusted his living expenses and is working to 
pay off his delinquent debts and taxes.  There is no documentary evidence in the record 
to prove any of these contentions.  Under the particular circumstances here, Applicant 
has failed to establish that he acted reasonably or responsibly with respect to his debts.  
Accordingly it is found that his debts all remain owing and that his tax returns in 
question have not been filed.  Applicant has not demonstrated that future financial 
problems are unlikely.  There are no indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline F – Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out in 
AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnoses with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all of 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23, however none of them are applicable.Despite 
the fact that Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent, he continues to drink 
alcohol.  There is no evidence in the record to demonstrate that he has stopped 
drinking.  He states that he has reduced his drinking, but provides nothing more to 
substantiate this averment.    
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
8 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-personal assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information.  
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violation. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulate or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group.  Such conduct 
includes: 
 
 (1) engaging in activities, which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s two convictions for DUI and his contempt of court conviction show 
poor judgment and unreliability.  Applicant’s alcohol abuse, debt, and failure to follow 
tax laws also show an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation and serious 
errors in his judgment.      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F, Guideline G, and Guideline E, in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has 
 
9 
 
has not shown that he is responsible concerning his debts, his alcohol abuse and his 
personal conduct.  He has provided no information concerning the debts, the alcohol 
abuse, his failure to file his taxes or his personal conduct that demonstrates appropriate 
mitigation.  Moreover, Applicant has not demonstrated that he is responsible.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations, the Alcohol 
Consumption, and the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
