 1 
         
             
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-06272 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
Applicant’s close ties to family members, combined with his substantial foreign financial 
interests, create a risk of divided allegiance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on March 23, 2015. 
On March 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 18, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on May 20, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), which included 
 2 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to Applicant on May 23, 2016. He was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on May 31, 2016, and his Response 
was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) within the allotted 
30 days and admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on February 10, 
2017. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017. The outcome of this 
case would have been the same if decided based on the former AG. 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
pertaining to India. The relevant facts are highlighted in my findings of fact, below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old president of a defense-contracting firm since August 
1989. He was born in India, immigrated to the United States in 1985, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1992. Applicant and his wife, also a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
married in India in 1987. They have two adult children and a 17-year-old, all born U.S. 
citizens. Applicant has held a security clearance since 1994. (GX 2; Response.) 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s mother, five brothers, sister, 
and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. The SOR further alleges that 
Applicant has seven bank accounts in India with a total balance of approximately 
$1,045,066. Applicant admits each of these allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
in my findings of fact. 
 
India is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Historically the relationship between the 
United States and India has been favorable and beneficial to both countries. The United 
States recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to strengthen its 
relationship with it. India has diplomatic relations with the United States. India and the 
United States pledged that both countries promised greater cooperation in countering 
terrorist networks and information sharing. However, India is reticent to discuss its nuclear 
security measures or allow inspections. India has good diplomatic relations with Iran and 
supports that country’s efforts to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. India’s 
largest supplier of military systems and spare parts is Russia. 
 
India is one of the countries that is most persistently targeted by foreign and 
domestic terrorist groups, and it continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities 
which may affect U.S. citizens directly or indirectly. Anti-Western terrorist groups, some 
on the U.S. government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India. In 
November 2008, terrorists coordinated attacks on multiple locations in Mumbai targeting 
areas frequented by Westerners, killing at least 183 people, eight of whom were from the 
 3 
United States. More recent attacks have targeted public places, including areas 
frequented by Westerners. 
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but continues 
to have serious human rights problems including police and security force abuses, 
extrajudicial killings, disappearances, torture, rape, and widespread corruption that 
contributed to ineffective responses to crimes. Other human rights problems include 
disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy 
pretrial detention. Rape, domestic violence, dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual 
harassment, and discrimination against women remain serious problems. A lack of 
accountability for misconduct at all levels of government persists. Investigations and 
prosecutions of individuals take place, but lax enforcement, a shortage of trained police 
officers, and an overburdened and under-resourced court system contribute to infrequent 
convictions. 
 
India is an avid collector of U.S. proprietary information, and there have been 
several criminal cases of industrial espionage arising out of India, both from private 
sources and from the government itself.  Examples include:  In March 2008, an American 
businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally exporting technology to entities in 
India: in January 2013, the former export control manager of a Pennsylvania-based 
company pled guilty to the illegal export of products that have military applications to India 
and China; and, in April 2015, the former owner of the New Jersey-based defense 
contracting business pled guilty to illegally exporting military blueprints to India. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. 
 
Applicant travels to India once or twice a year to visit his family members. He 
speaks to his mother and one of his brothers by telephone once a week. He speaks with: 
one of his brothers by telephone once a month; his sister, two brothers and father-in-law 
quarterly; and, his other brother once a year. None of Applicant’s foreign family members 
is affiliated with the government of India. (GX 2; GX 3.) 
 
In 1994 or 1995, Applicant and his wife purchased an apartment building in India, 
in Applicant’s wife’s name. The purchase price was approximately $35,000 and the current 
value is approximately $135,000. (GX 2; GX 3.) This foreign financial interest was not 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
In about January 1999, Applicant invested approximately $500,000 in seven 
certificates of deposit (CD), valued at approximately $1,045,066 in December 2014, at a 
bank in Mumbai, India. Applicant elected to invest in the CDs due to a high interest rate. 
This money is intended for use for Applicant’s retirement, his children’s college educations, 
and for unanticipated or emergency expenses. He states in his April 2015 personal subject 
interview (PSI), that he is willing to pay early withdrawal penalties and transfer the funds 
back to U.S. bank accounts. Applicant states that he has properly reported his foreign 
investments as required by the Federal government. In his Response, he again states his 
willingness to transfer the money back to the United States. He also states that, “it seems 
 4 
that the only issue is the money that I invested in India, since none of my family information 
has changed since I first received my security clearance.”  
 
Applicant purchased his home in July 1993. However, there is no record evidence 
of the value of his home. Additionally, there is no record evidence of the value, if any, of 
Applicant’s other U.S.-based assets. Finally, Applicant did not make any affirmative 
assertions regarding his ties or loyalties to the United States. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
 5 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 Given Applicant’s ties to his foreign family members and his substantial foreign 
financial interests, the record evidence establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
 6 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
AG ¶ 7(f): substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family 
ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. A[T]here 
is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002); see also ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 16, 2011).   
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress 
is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the 
nature of the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist 
activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing  decision  to  grant  clearance  where  administrative  judge  did  
not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
Given India’s significant human rights and terrorism problems, and its history of 
economic collection and industrial espionage against the United States, Applicant’s 
relationships with his and his wife’s immediate family members in India, combined with 
his substantial financial interests in India, create a “heightened risk” of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, coercion, or personal conflict of 
interest. 
 7 
Application of Guideline B is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely 
an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices 
that could be important to a loved one, such as a family member.  ISCR Case No. 08-10025 
at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(f): the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 1994, therefore, he previously 
mitigated any potential security concerns raised by his contacts with his foreign family 
members. However, Applicant’s substantial foreign-held assets have increased his 
footprint in India, and changed the potential significance of his ties to his foreign family 
members. Applicant regularly visits his family members in India, and maintains varying 
degrees of telephonic contact with each of them. Applicant’s ties to his family members 
are close and frequent, and could potentially create a conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 8(a) 
through 8(b) do not apply. 
 
Applicant invested a significant amount of money in CDs in India beginning in 1999, 
five years after he was first granted a security clearance. Even if Applicant was initially 
unaware that a substantial financial interest in a foreign country could raise a security 
concern, he has been aware of the Government’s concern since at least March 2016, 
when he received the SOR.  
 
Furthermore, after answering questions during his PSI about his financial holdings in 
India in April 2014, and stating his willingness to move them back to the United States, 
 8 
he did not do so. He did not transfer the money back to the United States after receiving 
the SOR in March 2016. In his May 2016 response to the FORM, Applicant confirmed his 
understanding of the Government’s concern about his foreign assets, and again stated 
his willingness to transfer the money from his CDs in India back to the United States. 
Again, he took no action to mitigate the security concern.  
 
Applicant stated that his accounts in India, totaling at least $1,045,066, are slated for 
his retirement, his children’s college funds, and emergency expenses. Clearly, these 
assets are important to Applicant’s overall financial portfolio. Additionally, the limited 
record evidence does not indicate whether Applicant intends to retire in the United States, 
India, or elsewhere. While there is no record evidence that Applicant has acted in a 
manner contrary to the interests of the United States, there is also no record evidence of 
Applicant’s “deep and long-standing relationships and loyalties in the United States.” AG 
¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked as a defense contractor since 1989, and has held a security 
clearance since 1994. However, he began investing substantial amounts of money in CDs 
in India in 1999, and despite his awareness of the Government’s concerns, he has not 
taken action to resolve this issue. Additionally in 1994 or 1995, Applicant and his wife 
bought an apartment in her name in India, with the current value of at least $135,000, 
further increasing Applicant’s financial ties to India. Based on the record as a whole, I am 
unable to unequivocally determine that his personal and financial ties to India do not 
create a security concern.    
 9 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal and financial ties to India. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has failed to carry his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant his eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
