 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06990 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 25, 2012. 
(Item 3.) On April 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline E. (Item 1.) The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on May 17, 2016 (Item 2), and requested 
a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on September 22, 2016. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 through 
8. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He responded to the FORM (Response) on or 
about October 19, 2016. Items 1 through 8, and Applicant’s Response are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 5, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
On June 8, 2017, the DOD implemented new AG.1 Accordingly, I have applied the 
June 2017 AG.2 However, because the September 2006 AG were in effect on the date 
the FORM was completed, I have also considered the September 2006 AG. Having 
considered both versions of the AG, I conclude that my decision would have been the 
same had I applied the September 2006 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 42, is married and has four children. (Item 3 at pages 5, 17~18, and 
21~23.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 1.a. Applicant denies that he falsified his October 2012 Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in response to Section 26 regarding “a lien,” when 
he failed to disclose an alleged, 2011 tax lien from State A. In his Answer, Applicant avers 
that he moved to State B in 2005; and as such, he was not subject to State A’s taxing 
authority. Furthermore, in his Response, he has submitted documentation from State A 
demonstrating that the tax lien was “WITHDRAWN” by State A. This allegation is found 
for Applicant. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denies that he falsified his October 2012 e-QIP in response to 
Section 26 regarding “bills or debts turned over to a collection agency,” when he failed to 
list seven past-due debts that are documented as past due by the Government’s 
November 2012 credit report. (Item 7 at pages 4, 5, and 7.) Applicant did, in fact, list three 
past-due debts; and avers that the largest, alleged unlisted debt, for $1,060 (b.(2)), is a 
duplicate of one of those he did disclose. (Item 3 at pages 33~34.) He further avers, “I did 
my best to list everything I had knowledge of.” Even assuming his averment as to the 
duplicate past-due debt is correct, it is clear from his January 2013 Subject Interview, to 
which Applicant had no objection, he was aware of at least four of the six remaining past-
due debts (b.(3), b.(4), b.(6), and b.(7)). Furthermore, without letters of support from those 
who know Applicant and who can testify as to his truthfulness and veracity, I cannot find 
that Applicant’s not listing six past-due debts, totaling in excess of $1,100, was a simple 
oversight.  This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 On December 10, 2016, the Security Executive Agent issued Directive 4 (SEAD-4), establishing a “single, 
common adjudicative criteria for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access 
to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position.” (SEAD-4 ¶ B, Purpose). The SEAD-4 
became effective on June 8, 2017 (SEAD-4 ¶ F, Effective Date). The National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG), which are found at Appendix A to SEAD-4, apply to determine eligibility for initial or 
continued access to classified national security information. (SEAD-4 ¶ C, Applicability).  
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on 
current DoD policy and standards). 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any determination under this order 
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information.) 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
4 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his e-QIP, the following 
disqualifying condition applies: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP. When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, 
does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence 
as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.3  
 
In this instance, I am not convinced that Applicant was unaware of the six past-
due debts totaling in excess of $1,100. He should have disclosed these facts to the 
Government. I find substantial evidence of an intent by Applicant to omit, conceal, or 
falsify facts from and on his SCAs. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
5 
 
 The personal conduct security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by 
any of the following potentially applicable factors in AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above, none of them apply. 
Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsifications or 
concealments. While he discussed the past-due debts with an investigator in January of 
2013 (Item 8 at pages 5~7), more than two months after executing his e-QIP, he failed to 
establish that his admissions were now prompt or in good-faith. He provided no 
information that indicates he was ill-advised in completing his e-QIP. Falsifying 
information is a serious offense, and Applicant has shown that similar lapses in judgment 
are likely to occur. Further, he failed to take responsibility for his actions. He has not 
provided sufficient information in this record to demonstrate that he has met his burden 
of proof for his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised 
by the falsification of his e-QIP. Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline E (Personal Conduct): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
