 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )       ISCR Case: 15-06587  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 18, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has filed three Chapter 7 bankruptcies between 1996 and 2016. The 
most recent was filed in February 2016, and there is no evidence it has been discharged. 
Applicant also had almost $10,000 in delinquent debt, which he did not show had been 
paid or resolved. Applicant did not show that his financial difficulties are under control. 
Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 22, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 5.) On March 25, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 9, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
4.) On June 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing fourteen Items,1 was 
mailed to Applicant on June 29, 2016, and received by him on July 12, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection 
to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period 
he was afforded. Items 1 through 5, and 7 through 14 are admitted into the record.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 47, a college graduate, and married with three grown children. He 
retired from the US Navy in March 2008, after a 20-year career. He has worked for a 
federal contractor since 2010. (Item 5.)  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted fourteen Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 6 is inadmissible. 
It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on May 31, 2015. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, Report of Investigation summaries are inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with explanations, 
except for allegations 1.d and 1.p. The admitted allegations are found to be true. Applicant 
denied allegation 1.d, with an explanation. He did not either admit or deny allegation 1.p, 
which I view as a denial. The allegations in the SOR will be considered out of order for 
ease of discussion: 
 
 1.c. Applicant has filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy three times. The first time was in 
March 1996. He received a discharge in June 1996. According to Applicant this 
bankruptcy was filed because of financial hardship brought about by paying increased 
child support. In a sworn statement dated August 9, 2004, Applicant said, “I claimed about 
$10,000 on the bankruptcy and included all open accounts. The accounts were mostly 
credit cards and smaller debts.” (Item 4, and Item 9 at 2.) No additional documentation 
concerning this bankruptcy was presented. 
 
 1.b. The second time Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection was in 
May 2004. Applicant stated that the reason behind this filing was due to the financial costs 
of child support, including legal fees. In his sworn statement Applicant said, “I claimed 
about $15000 to $20000 and the paperwork included all our open accounts.” Bankruptcy 
records show that Applicant actually discharged approximately $92,000 of unsecured 
debt on this occasion. He received a discharge in August 2004. (Item 4, Item 8, and Item 
9 at 2-3.)  
 
 1.p. Based on his financial situation, including the 2004 bankruptcy, Applicant 
received a “Conditional Security Determination” letter from the Department of the Navy 
Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF)3 on June 8, 2005. (Item 10.) Applicant was 
granted a Secret security clearance at that time, but was warned that he had to, “Maintain 
a stable and solvent financial status, ensuring payments to all creditors are accomplished 
in a regular and timely manner.” He was further told that failure to do so would be a cause 
for immediate reconsideration. 
 
 1.o. Applicant admitted that he had received a tax lien from his state taxing 
authority concerning back taxes. The lien was in the approximate amount of $873. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that this debt has been paid in full, but provided no 
documentation to support that statement. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that he had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 
February 2016. Applicant indicated in the petition that he had taken the credit counseling 
                                                 
3 The DON CAF became part of the DoD CAF on January 27, 2013. 
 
 
4 
 
 
required by bankruptcy law. In the petition Applicant admitted having between $100,001 
to $500,000 in liabilities. The FORM does not contain a copy of the bankruptcy schedules 
that contain a listing of the debts Applicant wishes to discharge in bankruptcy, or a copy 
of any discharge. Applicant did not respond to the FORM with either one of these 
documents. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant stated in his Answer that this bankruptcy was due to work-related issues 
including: his having to take a job in 2010 that paid half of what he had been making; his 
wife being out of work in 2012 for six months; and his wife having a medical issue in 2014 
that kept her out of work for over a year. He stated that they had a debt management plan 
that fell through, but a copy of the plan was not provided. 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied that he had a judgment filed against him in 2013 in the 
amount of $622. He stated in his Answer, “I was never served with court papers or notified 
in any way of the court hearing.” Support for this debt was found in 2015 and 2016 credit 
reports. (Items 13 and 14.) 
 
 Applicant further stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 
bankruptcy as an unsecured debt because he had been advised that the judgment would 
not be reversed. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the 
debt has been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing a medical creditor $36 for a past-due debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admitted owing a medical creditor $128 for a past-due debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.g Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,125 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $457 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.i. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $450 for a charged-off debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
 
 
5 
 
 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $778 for a past-due debt. Applicant stated 
in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured debt. 
No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has been 
discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,649 for a past-due debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.l. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $722 for a past-due debt. Applicant stated 
in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured debt. 
No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has been 
discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.m. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $1,160 for a past-due debt. Applicant 
stated in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured 
debt. No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has 
been discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.n. Applicant admitted owing a bank  $1,745 for a past-due debt. Applicant stated 
in his Answer that he had listed this debt in his 2016 bankruptcy as an unsecured debt. 
No documentation was submitted supporting that statement, or that the debt has been 
discharged. This debt is not resolved. 
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
 
6 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
 
7 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been continuously employed by a federal contractor since 2010. He 
has a considerable number of past-due debts, and has filed for bankruptcy three times. 
Applicant submitted no evidence that the debts in the SOR are included in his most recent 
bankruptcy or were otherwise paid or resolved. These facts establish prima facie support 
for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate 
those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in February 2016, the third time 
he had done so. The bankruptcy schedules were not provided by Applicant, even though 
he had been informed in the FORM of his ability to supplement the record. There is 
 
 
8 
 
 
insufficient evidence to determine that the circumstances are unlikely to recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that his most recent problems were due to work-related drops in 
income, and his wife’s injury. However, Applicant provided no documentation to support 
his statements about a drop in income, or how he attempted to responsibly manage the 
problem before filing for bankruptcy. Mitigation is not established under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant indicated that he received the credit counseling required by bankruptcy 
law. However, the record does not show clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish complete mitigation 
of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Bankruptcy is an accepted way to resolve debts. However, in this case, Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient supporting evidence to find that his use of bankruptcy in 2016 
was appropriate under the circumstances. None of the mitigating conditions apply to his 
case. Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not show that his 
most recent bankruptcy had been discharged, or that the alleged past-due debts in the 
SOR had been resolved. He was granted clearance eligibility in 2005 on condition that he 
maintain a stable and solvent financial status, ensuring that payments to all creditors were 
timely made. He failed to comply with this requirement. There is insufficient support for a 
 
 
9 
 
 
finding of national security eligibility. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress 
remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:  Against Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
