 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04604 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On February 1, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to Applicant, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to 
hold a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the September 1, 2006 AGs and are 
effective “for all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs, as required.1 
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the interests of national security to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  
  
On March 24, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated January 18, 2017, was provided to him by letter dated January 
24, 2017. Applicant received the FORM on February 8, 2017. He was afforded a period 
of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not submit any additional information within the 30-day period. On October 
1, 2017, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. Additional findings 
of fact follow. 
 
Background Information2 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old manager employed by a defense contractor since July 
1997. He seeks a security clearance in conjunction with his current employment.   
 
Applicant received his high school diploma in April 2004. He was awarded a 
bachelor’s degree in July 2007. Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from February 1974 
to March 1996, and received an honorable discharge. He was married from April 1976 
to December 1981, and that marriage ended by divorce. Applicant remarried in April 
1985. He has four adult children. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists three allegations under this concern: 1.a. - a credit card 
collection account for $4,759; 1.b – a medical collection account for $707; and 1.c. – he 
failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. 
These allegations are established through the Government’s exhibits (Items 1 – 6) 
                                                          
1 The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.  
 
2 The limited background information regarding Applicant was derived from the FORM and was the most 
current information available. 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 In Applicant’s October 28, 2014 Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI), Applicant stated the $4,759 credit card collection account 
was his wife’s business account, and he was not aware that his name was associated 
with that account. He stated that he intended to satisfy that debt in full by December 
2014. (Item 3) In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated that he believed the creditor 
provided his wife a FORM 1099-C to file with their tax return. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant stated in his OPM PSI that the $707 medical collection account came 
about because of an insurance coordination issue. He was disputing this bill, but if it 
was determined that he owed the money, he would “satisfy the amount immediately.” 
(Item 3) In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated that the hospital bill was not filed 
correctly and that the “[h]ospital was notified.” (Item 1)  
 
Applicant stated in his OPM PSI that his wife had a hard time keeping the 
financial books of her DVD business in order. Because of her books being in a “mess,” 
his wife was unable to gather the necessary records to file their taxes for tax years 2010 
through 2013. Applicant hired a tax preparer in 2014 to address his wife’s bookkeeping 
problems and file their taxes. He stated in that interview that he intended to satisfy any 
tax liability by mid-2015. (Item 3) In Applicant’s SOR answer, he stated, “all years have 
been filed.” 
 
   Applicant did not provide documentation to corroborate the claims made in his 
SOR answer. On May 13, 2016, Department Counsel initiated an e-mail exchange with 
Applicant following a telephone conversation seeking documentation that would mitigate 
his tax situation and two debts. In particular, Department Counsel requested that 
Applicant provide tax transcripts for tax years 2010 through 2015 or additional proof of 
filing and a copy of FORM 1099-C that he referred to in his SOR answer. Applicant did 
not provide the requested documentation as of August 3, 2016 in response to 
Department Counsel’s e-mails nor did he provide the requested documentation in 
response to Department Counsel’s FORM. (Item 6) 
 
In short, the file lacks sufficient evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, 
settled, compromised, disputed, or otherwise resolved his SOR allegations. He did not 
describe financial counseling or present a budget. The record lacks corroborating or 
substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes for his financial 
problems and other mitigating information. The FORM noted that Applicant had 30 days 
from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth 
objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not 
file any objections or submit any additional information . . . your case will be assigned to 
an Administrative Judge for a determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in 
this FORM. As noted, Applicant did not submit evidence responsive to the FORM. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
  
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides four disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”; and “(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.” Based on the information in the SOR, the record established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), and 19(f) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 20 lists six potential mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
In summary, no mitigating conditions fully apply. In addition to evaluating the 
facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have 
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 
2(d). Applicant has been gainfully employed for the majority of his adult life, and he is 
presumed to be a mature, responsible citizen. Nonetheless, without other information 
suggesting his long-standing financial problems are being addressed, doubts remain 
about his suitability for access to classified information. Protection of the national 
interest is the principal focus of these adjudications. According, those doubts must be 
resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In so doing, however, he failed to 
submit sufficient evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such 
information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient supporting 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
documentation to fully establish mitigation, financial considerations security concerns 
remain. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
ROBERT TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
