KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant’s brief includes new evidence, which we cannot consider. Otherwise, it
constitutes a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the evidence. However, an ability to argue for
a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 15-07654.a1
DATE: 10/25/2017
DATE: October 25, 2017
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-07654
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 6, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 7, 2017, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline J are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the military from 1986 to 1996, rising to the grade of E-4.  He later
attended college, graduating summa cum laude.  Divorced in 2005, Applicant has four adult
children. In 2009 or 2010, Applicant worked for the Federal Government, during which time he was
injured on the job.  He did not receive income for about six months due to this injury.  From 2011
until 2015 Applicant was unemployed, although he received partial disability payments from the
Government.  These payments were reduced in 2015.
Applicant’s SOR alleged that he failed to file and/or pay his Federal and state income tax
returns for several years in the 2000s.  In addition, during the same time period, he did not file in
a timely manner several state income tax returns that were not alleged in the SOR, although the
Judge considered them for purposes such as Applicant’s case for mitigation, his credibility, the
whole-person analysis, etc.  Applicant has filed Federal income tax returns for most of the years at
issue here, and his attorney is working on filing those for his state.  Applicant has two Federal tax
liens regarding his total IRS debt of about $53,000.  Applicant stated that the IRS had agreed to
settle this account for $6,000.  He initially stated that he would send payment within 90 days but
then asserted that the IRS would need that much time in which to complete the settlement.   
Applicant attributed his tax problems to his ex-spouse having claimed their children as
dependents on her returns.  As a consequence, Applicant fell into a “spiral” in which he was unable
to pay his tax obligation.  Decision at 4.  Applicant has other debts, such as a judgment in the
amount of about $1,100 and collection accounts that total a little over $2,000.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cited to Applicant’s unemployment, divorce, and disability.  He stated, however,
that Applicant had begun mishandling his income taxes before these circumstances arose.  The Judge
noted that Applicant had not demonstrated that he had settled his debts or paid amounts owed.  He
cited to Appeal Board precedent to the effect that, even if an applicant has paid or resolved certain
debts, a Judge may consider the factors underlying those debts for what they may reveal about the
applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  The Judge stated that there is insufficient evidence explaining
why Applicant was unable to make greater progress in resolving his tax issues.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s educational attainment; his
military service, which included tours of duty overseas; and his character evidence.  However, he
concluded that the evidence against granting a clearance was more substantial.  He cited to
Applicant’s failure to have filed his returns for many years and a paucity of evidence corroborating
his claims of debt resolution.  He stated that more documentation is necessary in order to establish
mitigation.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes new evidence, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Otherwise, it constitutes a challenge to the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  However, an ability
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed
the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.    See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 15-08711 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2017).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax
returns and paying taxes when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and
reliability required of those granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
06707 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017).  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
