 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-08455 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns raised 
by his financial situation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
On November 3, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision 
on the administrative (written) record.  
 
 On December 19, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant five exhibits (Items 1 – 5) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM on February 2, 
2017 (Response). With the Response, Applicant submitted several documents regarding 
family and medical issues that impacted his finances. These documents were collectively 
marked Exhibit A. Without objection, Items 1 – 5, Applicant’s Response, and Exhibit A, 
are admitted into the record.  
 
 
2 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after receiving confirmation that Applicant remained 
sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned his case for decision. No additional matters 
were submitted by either party for inclusion in the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 57, earned his high school diploma in 1980 and shortly thereafter 
enlisted in the U.S. military. He retired from the military in 1998. He was granted a security 
clearance in approximately 1983. Since retiring from the military, Applicant has been 
primarily employed as a federal contractor, but he has experienced periods of 
unemployment. He has been gainfully employed as a federal contractor since July 2013.1 
He admits that he has “a lot of debt that I haven’t paid.”2 He has made repeated promises 
during the course of the security clearance process that he would take action to address 
his past-due debts.3 He submitted no documentation showing that he addressed the past-
due debts alleged in the SOR, including the $20,000 in debts that he admits.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems date back to at least 2002, when he stopped making 
payments on a time share that he had purchased about a month earlier. The creditor 
eventually charged off the time-share debt. In 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with issuing a bad check.4 Applicant attributes his past and present financial problems to 
a number of issues: 
 
- Overspending during his first marriage; 
 
- Contentious and costly divorce in 2009; 
 
- Raising and financially supporting three children on his own after the divorce;  
 
- His oldest son’s petty criminal activity and resulting legal expenses; 
 
- Unstable employment and periods of unemployment; 
 
- Death of several family members; and 
 
- Health issues.5 
 
  
                                                          
1 Item 2; Item 3 at 6.  
 
2 Item 1, Answer, Enclosure 2 at 1.  
 
3 Items 1 - 3; Response. 
 
4 Item 2 at 36; Item 3 at 9 (bounced check arrest and time share). These past financial issues were not 
alleged in the SOR and were only considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case. See infra n. 14. 
 
5 Items 1 - 3; Response; Exhibit A. 
 
3 
 
Security Clearance Application and Interviews 
 
In July 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance. In response to questions 
about his financial history, Applicant reported having nine delinquent accounts. For each 
of the nine debts, Applicant stated that he had already resolved the debt, was in the 
process of resolving the debt, or after starting his new job, would address the debt.6 
 
 In July 2015, Applicant’s security clearance background interviews took place. 
Applicant discussed with the security clearance investigator the nine delinquent accounts 
listed on his security clearance application, as well as over 20 other delinquent accounts 
listed on his credit reports. These other delinquent accounts included a debt for over 
$10,000 for a repossessed vehicle (SOR 1.a), a 2005 state tax lien (SOR 1.o), and a $36 
collection account (SOR 1.m).7 Applicant informed the investigator that he started making 
payments towards some of his delinquent accounts, including the state tax lien, in 2012, 
when he was a federal employee and was told by his military employer that he needed to 
address his past-due debts.8 
 
 During the July 2015 security clearance interviews, Applicant also reported that 
after paying his recurring monthly expenses and debts that he had over $1,600 in monthly 
disposable income.9 He repeatedly promised the investigator that he would contact his 
overdue creditors and make arrangements to resolve his past-due debts.10  
 
As for the $36 collection account (SOR 1.l), Applicant told the security clearance 
investigator that he paid the debt a few days before the first interview took place.11 He did 
not have proof at the time of the first interview, so the investigator made arrangements to 
meet with Applicant a few days later to give him time to review his records and gather any 
needed documents. The summary of the second interview prepared by the investigator 
does not reflect that Applicant provided a copy of a receipt or other document showing 
that he paid the $36 collection account.12 
 
Answer 
 
In November 2016, Applicant submitted his notarized Answer. He admitted those 
debts referenced at SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n, which total over $20,000. He 
submitted no documentation showing that he had addressed any of these debts, including 
                                                          
6 Item 2 at 44-52 (one of the debts Applicant self-reported on the application was the charged-off time share 
account that he defaulted shortly after he purchased it in 2002).  
 
7 Item 3 at 9-16.  
 
8 Item 3 at 12.  
 
9 Item 3 at 17.  
 
10 Item 3 at 9-16.  
 
11 Item 3 at 15.  
 
12 Item 3 at 16-18.  
 
4 
 
the same $36 collection account that he told the security clearance investigator he had 
supposedly paid shortly before his first security clearance interview in July 2015.  
 
Applicant denied the other non-tax-related debts referenced in the SOR, which 
together total about $4,000. For these other debts, Applicant explained that he denied 
them because they no longer appeared on his credit reports. He did not submit a credit 
report with his Answer to corroborate his assertion.  
 
Applicant also denies the 2005 state tax lien referenced in SOR 1.o and that he 
discussed with the investigator in July 2015. He claims that he satisfied the debt in the 
past, but submitted no documentation to corroborate his claim. Applicant further stated in 
his Answer that he was advised to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy to address his financial 
situation and was considering following said advice. 
 
Response 
 
In February 2017, Applicant submitted his Response to the FORM. For the first 
time, he claimed that the SOR debts that no longer appeared on his credit report were 
debts he had paid. He did not submit a credit report or other documentation showing he 
had paid any of the SOR debts. He further stated in his Response that he had discussed 
his financial situation with his security manager and an attorney and was going to file for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to resolve his debts. No evidence that Applicant took this or any 
other action to address his past-due debts was submitted. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards).13  
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
                                                          
13 Nonetheless, I have considered the previous version of the adjudicative guidelines that were in effect at 
the time the SOR was issued and my ultimate decision in this case would have been the same.  
 
5 
 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.14 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
14 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Likewise, a judge can only use non-alleged conduct for specific 
limited purposes, such as, assessing mitigation and credibility, unless an applicant is placed on notice that 
such conduct also raises a security concern. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
6 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .15  
 
Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt cast doubt upon a person’s judgment, self-control, and other qualities 
essential to protecting classified information.16 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered all the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, including the following: 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to . . . pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control . . . and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem . . . and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
AG ¶ 20(e):  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g):  the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate 
tax authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 18. 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s finances have been impacted by several matters largely beyond his 
control. However, he has been gainfully employed as a federal contractor for over four 
years and, as of July 2015, reported having over $1,600 a month in disposable income 
that he could presumably use to address his delinquent debts. Notwithstanding the 
proceeding, Applicant has yet to take action to address his delinquent accounts, including 
a relatively minor $36 collection account – a debt that he claimed during his first security 
clearance interview in July 2015, he had paid a few days earlier. 
 
In 2012, Applicant, who was a federal employee at the time, was told by his 
employer that he needed to address his past-due debts. He purportedly made payments 
to his overdue creditors for a time and then stopped. He did not resume making payments 
after being hired by his current employer, as he promised in his security clearance 
application. He has now made similar promises to address his past-due debts in his 
Answer and Response. Applicant’s past actions though reflect an unwillingness on his 
part to pay his debts. As of the close of the record, over $20,000 in delinquent debt that 
Applicant was first made aware of during the July 2015 security clearance (and are 
reflected on credit reports admitted into the record without objection) remain.  
 
Applicant has also been aware of the need to supply corroborating documentation 
showing he has addressed the SOR debts or validating his dispute of a debt. Although 
he provided a substantial amount of documentation regarding some family and medical 
issues that impacted his finances, he provided no documentation of his purported efforts 
to address his past-due debts. No evidence of financial or debt counseling was provided. 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) – 19(c) apply. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply.  
 
Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free. They 
are also not required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present evidence 
to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their circumstances, to include 
the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the burden of showing that they 
manage their finances in a manner expected of those granted access to classified 
information.17 Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof and persuasion.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In making such 
assessments, an administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.18 I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 15-02585 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2016) (reasonable for judge to expect an applicant to present documentary evidence). Contrast with 
ISCR Case No. 15-05478 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017) (error for judge to accept applicant’s self-serving 
assertions that he had resolved financial issues without corroborating documentary evidence).  
 
18 See generally AG ¶ 2. See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4; Directive, ¶ 6.3. 
 
8 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military and was first granted a security clearance in 
1983. A number of issues largely beyond his control have negatively impacted his 
finances over the years. However, he has had the financial means to address his past-
due debts for some time and has chosen not to pay his debts. He failed to act even after 
being informed that his delinquent debts placed his clearance (and likely continued 
employment as a federal contractor) in jeopardy. He may in the future be able to re-
establish his eligibility for a security clearance, but, at present, the security concerns 
raised by his financial situation remain. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for continued access to classified information.19 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive, ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.z:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Applicant’s 
request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
19 I considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C, but none are warranted. For instance, 
conditioning eligibility upon Applicant providing proof that he addressed his past-due debts and that he 
remain financially stable would not be appropriate in light of his past history and dishonest statements about 
his past debt resolution efforts See SEAD-4, ¶ E.3 and AG ¶ 2(h). 
