 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-08481  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant owes $160,000 for an unpaid judgment that was entered against him in 
2010. He offered no evidence of either efforts or means to resolve this debt. Resulting 
security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On April 21, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 2.) On May 22, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 13, 2016,1 and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
July 27, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 27, 2016, and received by him on August 2, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not 
file any objection to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond 
the 30-day period he was afforded. Items 1 through 4 are admitted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions2 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old, married, and has a 5-year-old child. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2002, and a master’s degree in 2005. He has held his present 
employment as a systems engineer with a major defense contractor since 2003; and is 
seeking to renew the security clearance he has held since 2005 in connection with that 
position. He has also worked as a licensed real estate agent and broker since 2010, 
and been responsible for home sales totaling more than $1.46 million. He has no prior 
military service or Federal civilian employment. (Items 1, 2.)  
 
 Applicant purchased a home as an investment in 2007 with a 30-year, $159,000 
first mortgage loan that required monthly payments of $1,394. He lived in a rental 
apartment from January 2005 until August 2009. In 2008, the mortgage lender initiated 
foreclosure proceedings after Applicant stopped making required payments. In October 
2010 the creditor holding the resulting debt obtained a civil judgment, to which Applicant 
agreed on advice of his attorney, for $160,000. Despite his full time employment with 
the defense contractor and his successful work as a real estate agent and broker since 
that time, Applicant has made no payments toward this judgment debt. (Items 1, 2, 4.) 
                                                 
1 Applicant dated his signed statement, “6/13/2014.” This was an obvious typographical error, since it 
would predate the SOR. His notarized forum selection and signature page contained the correct date.  
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant said, in his April 2015 SF-86 description of this debt, that he had hired 
an attorney to represent him with respect to his options for obtaining relief from creditors 
under bankruptcy law. He said that the attorney advised him the judgment debt was 
unsecured and would be dischargeable, but that he had postponed filing bankruptcy 
due to the birth of his child and the accumulation of associated recent new debt. Finally, 
he said that he planned to file bankruptcy to discharge the debt later that year (2015). 
(Item 2.)   
 
 In Applicant’s June 2016 answer to the SOR, he claimed that a series of new 
debts he incurred as a result of confusion over his medical insurance claim procedures, 
as well as the unexpected failures of most of his major home appliances and utility 
systems, caused him to decide to delay his planned 2015 bankruptcy filing. He said that 
he continued to work with his bankruptcy attorney’s staff, and planned to file in late 
summer or early fall of 2016. (Item 1.) As noted above, he was offered the opportunity 
to provide additional information in response to the FORM until September 1, 2016, but 
neither provided proof of any action toward resolving this debt nor requested additional 
time in order to do so.  
 
 Applicant provided June 4, 2016 credit reports from all three major credit 
bureaus, which showed that he was current on all of his debt payments except the 
$160,000 judgment alleged in the SOR. He also submitted letters from four friends and 
colleagues who unanimously expressed their high opinions of his character, 
trustworthiness, integrity, and responsibility. (Item 1.)  
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling, other than his 
unsubstantiated statements that he had consulted with a bankruptcy attorney and his 
staff. He provided no budget information from which to predict his future solvency, or his 
ability to make any required bankruptcy payments should he eventually obtain a 
confirmed Chapter 13 plan. He offered no evidence to support findings concerning the 
level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures 
there. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he 
elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been continuously employed by a major defense contractor since 
2003, yet incurred $160,000 in delinquent debt in 2008 that has been reduced to 
judgment since 2010. He documented neither the ability nor any effective effort to 
satisfy this debt. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant continues to owe the $160,000 judgment debt, to which he agreed in 
2010. His failure to address this substantial debt in any meaningful way over the past 
seven years creates ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not 
continue or recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that he made a bad real estate investment, and a subsequent 
series of new debts resulted in his choice not to file for bankruptcy relief. He never said 
that he intended to pay the judgment debt in whole or in part. Some of his post-
judgment new debts may have arisen from circumstances beyond his control, although 
he acknowledged that the judgment debt itself resulted from voluntary choices on his 
part. In any event, the evidence does not sufficiently establish causation between 
circumstances beyond his control and either the original debt or his failure to address it 
during the past seven years. Nor did he otherwise show that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling or budget information 
establishing solvency going forward while addressing this judgment. He failed to 
demonstrate that the problem is being resolved, is under control, or that a good-faith 
effort toward resolution has actually been initiated. Accordingly, Applicant failed to 
establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 
20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe $160,000 for a delinquent 
judgment debt to which he agreed seven years ago and cannot afford to repay. He 
stated on multiple occasions since 2015 that he intends to file for bankruptcy relief to 
address this debt, but failed to demonstrate any meaningful steps toward that end. The 
potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the 
evidence creates doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:         Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
