1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case: 15-08755 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
October 24, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant owes more than $26,000 in unresolved debt. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security 
eligibility is denied.  
Statement of Case 
On August 29, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. (Item 
3.) On May 19, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2016, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) 
On October 17, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on October 17, 2016, and received by him on October 31, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
submitted additional information in response to the FORM on October 31, 2016 (Reply). 
In his Reply, he presented evidence that another Government agency had recently 
completed a periodic reinvestigation and adjudicated it favorably. On August 2, 2017, the 
case was assigned to me.  
 
 On October 2, 2017, I reopened the record in the case for Applicant to submit 
additional documentation on two issues. First, he was requested to provide information 
on the level of clearance adjudicated favorably in 2015 to determine if reciprocity was 
required in this case. Second, he was given the opportunity to address the specific 
financial allegations in this case. He submitted an email from his security officer and a 
written statement in response to the reopening of the record. Those documents are 
marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The email from the security officer did not establish that 
he had a security clearance at the requested level, and the Government was unable to 
determine that reciprocity should be granted. Department Counsel had no objection to 
AE A, and it was admitted along with his Reply. Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 
6. They are admitted into the record. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG promulgated in SEAD 
4. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He is married to his third wife. He has worked for his 
current employer, a Federal contractor, since 2006. He served on active duty in the 
Marine Corps from 1974 to 1978. He was honorably discharged in 1978. He then served 
                                                 
1SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
in the Air Force Active Reserve from 1985 to 1988, and received an honorable discharge 
in March 1988. (Item 3.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. (Item 2.) His delinquent debts are also documented in a credit bureau report from 
November 2015. (Item 4.) Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his November 2011 
separation and 2012 divorce from his second wife. After Applicant separated from his ex-
wife, he did not have sufficient funds to cover all of the debts incurred during his past 
marriage. (Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant was indebted on two judgments in the respective amounts of $17,763, 
and $8,967, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. (Item 4 at 5.) They were filed in 2013 and 
2012. Applicant claimed to have offered to “set-up a payment plan with both financial 
institutions” but his requests were denied. Both creditors requested payment in full, which 
Applicant was unable to afford. As a result, these debts remain unresolved. (Item 5; AE 
A.) 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling or provide budget information 
from which to predict his future solvency. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning his character or trustworthiness, the quality of his professional performance, 
the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling 
sensitive information and observation of security procedures. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent adjudicative guidelines. In addition to 
brief introductory explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
 
4 
 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable or unwilling to repay his alleged delinquencies. These 
financial issues date back to 2012, and continue to date. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $26,000 for debts that became delinquent 
beginning in 2012. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will 
not recur, so mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant asserted that his delinquent debts arose from conditions that were 
beyond his control, namely his 2011 separation and 2012 divorce. However, he failed to 
show that he acted responsibly under the circumstances, as required for mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(b). He also failed to provide evidence of financial counseling or efforts to resolve 
the debts that could establish mitigation under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, who 
is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $26,000 in debt that has 
been delinquent since 2012, and either cannot or chooses not to repay it. The potential 
for pressure, exploitation, or duress from his financial situation remains undiminished. 
Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and 
suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
     
  
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
