 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-05460  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 2, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 26, 2016. He admitted all of the 
allegations, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the 
written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On June 16, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), containing eight Items.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM on August 1, 2016. He did not object to Items 
1 through 8. Applicant also submitted additional information, relating to two financial 
matters that were not alleged, in the SOR, to which Department Counsel had no 
objection. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 10, 2017. Items 1 through 8 are 
admitted into evidence. Applicant’s response to the FORM (Response) is marked as 
exhibit (AppX) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 70 years old. (Item 3 at page 5.) He is married, with one child. (Item 
3 at pages 15 and 20.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes his admitted financial difficulties to a period of unemployment 
when he lost his contractor position in “October 2012,” until when “work began to pick 
up in 2015.” (Answer at page 2.) Also, in “July 2015 . . . [he] suffered a cardiac arrest 
and spent a week hospitalized and after that several months recovering until January 
2016 when . . . [he] returned to work.” (Id.) 
 
 1.a. The first alleged past-due debt is a 2012 outstanding judgment in the amount 
of about $2,909. In his Answer, Applicant averred that “circumstances will allow 
repayment in the next 12 to 18 months,” but has submitted nothing further in this regard. 
(Answer at page 2.) This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.b. The second alleged past-due debt is a 2011 outstanding judgment in the 
amount of about $7,794. In his Answer, Applicant averred that the creditor “has been 
receiving regular installments and the debt is approximately $800,” but has submitted 
nothing further in this regard. (Answer at page 2.) This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.c. The third alleged past-due debt is a medical bill in the amount of about $92. 
In his Answer, Applicant averred that “this will be paid by July 2016” (Answer at page 2.)   
 
 
3 
 
 
However, in his August 2016 Response he has submitted nothing further in this regard. 
This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.d.~1.i. These six admitted past-due debts total about $47,397. In his Answer, 
Applicant simply averred that he is “Seeking Counseling/Guidance,” but has submitted 
nothing further in regard to these debts. (Answer at page 2.) These allegations are 
found against Applicant.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .   
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has two outstanding judgments totaling about $10,700, and seven 
past-due debts totaling in excess of $47,000. These facts establish prima facie support 
for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate 
those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
However, Applicant has not acted responsibly under the circumstances that were 
beyond his control (his more than two years of unemployment and his January 2016 
heart attack).  Furthermore, there are not clear indications that his financial issues are 
under control, and there is no demonstrative improvement in his financial situation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He has not met his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.i.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
