 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-07895 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
       Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. He has worked as a translator for the U.S. military for over 10 years. Senior 
U.S. military officers who have worked with Applicant vouch for his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and loyalty to the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to his relatives in Afghanistan raise 
a security concern under the foreign influence guideline. Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a decision on the administrative (written) record.1 
 
 On November 30, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s mother (1.a), a brother (1.f), and a friend (1.g) were alleged in the SOR as potential sources 
of adverse foreign influence. Applicant’s mother died shortly before the SOR was issued. The brother and 
friend are U.S. citizens, who reside in the United States. Accordingly, these three allegations are decided 
for Applicant and will not be further discussed.  
 
2 
 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant fourteen exhibits (Items 1 – 14) that the Government 
offers for admission into the record. Applicant submitted a response to the FORM on 
December 24, 2016. With his Response, Applicant submitted reference letters from senior 
U.S. military officers who have worked with him in Afghanistan. The Response and 
accompanying exhibits, which total 35 pages, were collectively marked Exhibit A. 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after the Hearing Office received confirmation that Applicant 
remained sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned the case. Without objection, the 
above-referenced exhibits are admitted into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. After graduating from college in 2004, he was 
recruited and hired by the U.S. military. From 2004 to 2007, Applicant worked for the U.S. 
military as a translator in Afghanistan. During this time, he was investigated by the U.S. 
military every six months. He earned a special immigrant visa in recognition of his work 
for the U.S. military and the dangers that he faced due to this work. He immigrated to the 
United States in 2007, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013.  
 
Applicant has been employed as a defense contractor since immigrating to the 
United States. He has served as linguist, translator, and cultural advisor for the U.S. 
military. He has deployed back to Afghanistan in support of the U.S. mission. He has gone 
through extensive vetting by the U.S. Government in connection with his employment on 
other U.S. Government contracts and immigration to the United States. 
 
In 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application in connection with 
his employment in the defense industry. He listed his foreign connections and contacts, 
and discussed them with a security clearance investigator. He also discussed with the 
investigator past background investigations conducted by the U.S. Government, including 
one a few months earlier when Applicant took and passed a polygraph examination in 
connection with his assignment to a U.S. military counterintelligence unit. Applicant has 
submitted similar applications in the past and is under the belief that he was previously 
granted a position of trust and, possibly, a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant has received numerous awards and certificates for his work in support 
of the U.S. military.3 Before he was permitted to immigrate to the United States, an 
extensive background investigation was conducted by the U.S. military. Based on the 
positive results of the background investigation and Applicant’s contributions to the U.S. 
military, those in his chain-of-command strongly recommended that the commanding 
general support Applicant’s application for a special immigrant visa.4  
 
                                                          
2 Items 3 – 8. 
 
3 Response at 8, 26-33. 
 
4 Response at 6-9. 
 
3 
 
A two-star general wrote the following in support of Applicant’s immigration 
application: 
 
It is my honor to recommend [Applicant] for special immigrant status under 
the provisions of Section 1959 of the National Defense Authorization Act  
. . . [He] has supported US forces in Afghanistan since July 2004, and meets 
all the requirements for immigration under this statute.  
 
[Applicant] has been a vital contributor to the US mission in Afghanistan on 
a number of levels. He has contributed significantly to our effective 
interaction with the Afghanistan Ministry of Defense (MoD) . . . As a 
translator and interpreter, he has participated in daily meetings with Senior 
Leadership of the Afghan National Army, and his skills have been absolutely 
crucial in dialogue between representative of the MoD and our counterparts 
on the US and Coalition side. His actions and demeanor have directly 
positively impacted positive development of the Afghan National Army. His 
steadfast commitment to professional service illustrates his dedication to 
the cause of freedom and democracy in Afghanistan.  
 
[Applicant] is a singularly impressive individual. [He] has proven his worth 
to senior members of my staff with intellect and character, and has 
continuously garnered endorsements of senior officials whom he has 
supported. . . . [He] is always relied upon as a trusted advisor by senior US, 
Coalition and Afghan staff members.  
 
[Applicant] is clearly one of the top translators supporting US forces in 
Afghanistan at this time, and has my strongest recommendation for 
immigration. Immigration under this program is an appropriate means to 
identify an individual who has continuously supported our US and Coalition 
forces, especially at great personal risk. More importantly, approving this 
request will continue to support US National Security objectives, and build 
strong ties with a free and democratic Afghanistan.5 
 
The former logistics chief for coalition forces in Afghanistan, a U.S. military officer 
in the O-6 paygrade, echoes the general’s favorable opinions and further notes that 
Applicant “holds himself to the highest standards both personally and professionally.” The 
O-6 goes on to state that “without [Applicant’s] professional, close-working relationships 
with the General Staff officers, and ‘can-do’ attitude, the success of the [US] mission 
would have been noticeably degraded.”6 Another O-6 U.S. military officer who worked 
with Applicant in Afghanistan submitted a letter providing his similar favorable 
impressions of Applicant’s work and character.7  
 
                                                          
5 Response at 3. 
 
6 Response at 4. 
 
7 Response at 5. 
 
4 
 
Applicant’s father, a brother, a sister, and his father and mother-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Afghanistan (SOR 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e). None of Applicant’s relatives 
have any current connection to the Afghan government or any foreign group or entity. 
When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in 2013, his wife was living 
in Afghanistan in his parents’ home. Applicant was able to resolve the bureaucratic issue 
stalling her immigration to the United States. She now lives in their home in the United 
States, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant’s father is a retired bank clerk, and resides in a home close to the U.S. 
Embassy. His brother worked for U.S. coalition forces, but now runs his own shop. His 
brother no longer lives in his father’s home. Applicant has no contact with his brother due 
to a family dispute. His sister married in early 2015 and is no longer considered a member 
of his father’s household. His father-in-law is a shopkeeper, while his mother-in-law does 
not work outside the home. Applicant has limited contact with his father and his in-laws, 
generally speaking to them once a year during the holidays via the internet.  
 
Applicant used to send money to his family in Afghanistan (SOR 1.h). He did so to 
provide financial support to his wife when she lived there and for his ill mother’s medical 
care before she died in April 2015. He last sent money to his family in 2015, to help pay 
for his mother’s funeral expenses. He sent this money to his brother. He also sent his 
brother a sizeable amount of money to replace a car, which his brother claimed had been 
stolen. He has not sent any additional money to his brother and they no longer speak.  
 
Applicant surrendered his former Afghan passport and renounced his Afghan 
citizenship in approximately 2013, in connection with his employment as a defense 
contractor. Applicant and his wife decided before his recent re-deployment to Afghanistan 
to not tell their family or anyone about his whereabouts or his work.8 
 
Administrative Notice - Afghanistan.9 
 
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic with a directly elected president, a bicameral 
legislative branch, and a judicial branch. The United States military has been engaged in 
Afghanistan since 2001. The State Department reports that, between 2001 and 2016, 
over 2,200 U.S. military members have died in Afghanistan. Additionally, over 20,000 
U.S. service members have been wounded in action.  
 
In July 2012, Afghanistan was designated by the United States as a major non-
NATO ally. Notwithstanding the efforts of the U.S. and its coalition partners, Afghanistan 
continues to face daunting challenges. Taliban, terrorists, and other hostile forces remain 
active throughout Afghanistan and pose a serious threat. The State Department warns 
U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan because of continued instability and threats 
against U.S. citizens. The State Department also reports the commission of human rights 
                                                          
8 Items 2 – 8. 
 
9 See generally Items 9 – 14; as updated by current information contained in Appellate Exhibit I (publically-
available U.S. State Department documents). 
 
5 
 
violations in Afghanistan, including the widespread disregard for the rule of law and official 
impunity for those who committed human rights abuses. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.10 
                                                          
10 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
 
6 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 Individuals are not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing a person’s 
potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign country involved, 
the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.11  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
                                                          
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
11 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
7 
 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”12 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.13 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate, such an applicant faces a 
very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their connections to and 
contacts with foreign relatives.14 
 
 Here, the security concern raised by Applicant’s connection to his relatives in 
Afghanistan is far from a mere hypothetical concern. The Taliban and other hostile forces 
have shown their conviction and, at times, ability to capture, torture, and kill Afghans who 
have been merely suspected of cooperating with USG forces. These groups have also 
shown a willingness to harm the family members of those who work for or cooperate with 
U.S. and coalition forces.  
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
8 
 
 However, no one is more acutely aware of the dangers posed by his work for the 
U.S. military than Applicant. For over 10 years now, Applicant has demonstrated his 
loyalty to the United States. From 2004-20007, Applicant was employed as a linguist by 
the U.S. military in Afghanistan. After earning a special immigrant visa and immigrating 
to the United States, he found gainful employment as a defense contractor. He 
volunteered to return to Afghanistan and once again face the serious risks that all U.S. 
military members and defense contractors face. He has demonstrated his reliability and 
trustworthiness in this combat environment. His familial ties to Afghanistan have 
decreased substantially since he submitted his security clearance application in 2013. In 
light of the overwhelming record evidence, it is reasonable to expect that Applicant will 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of U.S. national security interests. 
 
Security clearance assessments about a person require a judge to closely examine 
the individual’s conduct and circumstances, both past and present. In a Guideline B case 
that assessment also involves an examination of the foreign country at issue, to include 
their present relationship with the United States and other relevant factors. After reviewing 
and weighing the evidence, both favorable and unfavorable, I find that Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his foreign familial connections. All of the above listed 
mitigating conditions apply, in full or in part, and together with the favorable whole-person 
factors raised by the evidence,15 mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 See AG ¶ 2 (whole-person concept). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining 
whether granting a person a clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
