 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08346 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, criminal 
conduct, and use of information technology security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior), E (personal conduct), J (criminal conduct), and M (use of information 
technology). Applicant responded to the SOR on June 27, 2016, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on October 19, 2016. At the same 
time, Department Counsel amended the SOR by striking the word “government” from 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, and replacing it with “company-issued,” and by striking the 
words “and your spouse” from SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 26, 2016. He responded to the FORM with documents that I have marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The case was assigned to me on October 17, 2017. 
The Government exhibits included in the FORM and AE A and B are admitted in 
evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1993. He has a bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 
1992, and additional education without a post-graduate degree. He has been married 
for more than 24 years. He has three children, ages 19, 17, and 13.1 
  
All of the allegations in the SOR, with slight variations, were adjudicated 
previously. Applicant had a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) administrative judge in December 2008. In March 2009, the administrative 
judge revoked Applicant’s security clearance based on the same information alleged in 
the current SOR and additional information not currently alleged. The revocation was 
affirmed by the DOHA Appeal Board in May 2009.2 
 
 The information alleged in this case came to light by virtue of a lifestyle polygraph 
in early 2005. From about 1996 through 2005, Applicant used his company computer to 
access adult pornography about once or twice a week. He knew that was against 
company policy. He viewed child pornography on his company computer about 6 to 12 
times between about 1998 and 2004. He knew that was against company policy and in 
violation of federal law.3 
 
 Applicant testified at his DOHA hearing in December 2008 that his “accessing of 
child pornography came out of frequent use of regular pornography,” and that his 
“access to child pornography did not stem from sexual desire, but rather a sense of 
looking at something taboo that [he] shouldn’t be accessing.” He stated that the 
polygraph opened his eyes to how wrong it was to view child pornography, and he 
confessed his actions to his wife. He stated that he has never viewed child pornography 
again.4 
 
 After the polygraph, Applicant received counseling from his pastor. He installed 
content-monitoring software on his company computer that prevented him from 
accessing pornographic sites. However, he was able to turn the software off and access 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 6. 
 
2 Items 5-9. 
 
3 Items 3, 5-9. 
 
4 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
pornography. He continued to view adult pornography on his company computer until 
about six months before his first DOHA hearing in December 2008. He continued to 
occasionally view pornography on his personal computer until about six to eight months 
before his background interview in March 2015.5 
 
 Applicant asserted that he is deeply remorseful for his actions, he will never view 
child pornography again, and he will never again access pornography on a company 
computer. He told the background investigator in March 2015 that he struggles with the 
temptation to view pornography every day, but prevents the behavior by constantly 
thinking about the repercussions associated with his actions. He learned to identify his 
triggers, such as fatigue and working in a secluded place. He stated that he made sure 
to work in open spaces to avoid further temptation. Applicant’s wife, two pastors, and a 
former supervisor are aware of Applicant’s conduct. He also shared his struggles with 
pornography with various men’s groups. It does not appear that his employer ever 
became fully aware of his conduct.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
                                                          
5 Items 3, 6, 9. 
 
6 Items 3, 6, 9; AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop; 
 
 
5 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant viewed pornography, including child pornography, on his company 
computer. He knew that was against company policy and in violation of federal law. His 
behavior reflected a severe lack of judgment and made him vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, and duress. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant sought counseling from his pastor to help with 
his compulsion to view pornography. Seeking counseling for a problem is a positive 
action. It does not raise a disqualifying condition. Applicant’s compulsive pornography 
viewing is already alleged in other allegations. SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress;  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet; and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 Applicant received counseling from his pastor and participated in men’s groups. It 
has been more than 12 years since he accessed child pornography and about 9 years 
since he accessed any pornography on his company computer. I nonetheless have 
lingering concerns. Applicant still struggles with the temptation to view pornography. His 
wife, two pastors, and a former supervisor are aware of Applicant’s conduct, but it does 
not appear that his employer ever became fully aware of his conduct. Applicant has 
lessened, but not eliminated, his vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. 
Accessing child pornography on a company computer is a serious crime and a 
significant abuse of company policy. The stigma that attaches when children are 
sexualized is not easily cast off. The conduct continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.7. While nobody ever discovered 
Applicant viewing pornography, it cannot be considered strictly private or discreet 
because it occurred on his work computer. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d) are not applicable. 
AG ¶¶ 14(c) and 14(e) are partially applicable. I find that sexual behavior concerns 
remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant committed a federal crime when he accessed child pornography on his 
computer. The above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 It has been more than 12 years since Applicant accessed child pornography. 
Nonetheless, I have unmitigated concerns under the same rationale discussed in the 
sexual behavior analysis.  
 
 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 09-03233 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2010). The Appeal Board determined that an 
applicant’s child molestation offense “even though it occurred long ago, impugn[ed] his trustworthiness 
and good judgment.” 
 
7 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology  
 
The security concern for use of information technology is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 Applicant knew he was violating company policy when he accessed pornography 
on his company computer. The above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
 The above analysis under sexual behavior also applies here. Applicant’s conduct 
continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
41(a) is not applicable.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
8 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant accessed pornography, including child pornography, on his company 
computer. His conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and 
duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly applicable because 
Applicant’s conduct is sufficient for an adverse determination under the sexual behavior, 
criminal conduct, and use of information technology guidelines. However, the general 
concerns about questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 15 and 16(c) are established.  
 
 SOR ¶ 4.a alleges that Applicant’s “children, friends, family members and/or co-
workers are not aware of his conduct and [he does] not wish for them to know.” That 
allegation does not allege any conduct that is not already alleged in SOR ¶ 4.b. It goes 
to whether the conduct is mitigated, which is not the purpose of an allegation. SOR ¶ 
4.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
9 
 
 Under the same rationale discussed above for sexual behavior, I find that 
Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. I find that personal conduct concerns remain despite the presence 
of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D, E, J, and M in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the sexual behavior, personal conduct, criminal conduct, and use of information 
technology security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant  
   
 
 
 
10 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
