 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04420 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and F (Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 9, 2014. On May 1, 
2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guidelines G and F. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.1  
                                                          
1 Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), was issued on December 10, 2016, revising the 2006 
adjudicative guidelines. The SEAD 4 guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017. The changes resulting from issuance of SEAD 4 did not affect my decision in this case. 
 
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on October 25, 2016. On October 31, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on November 14, 2016, and did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations.3 His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old pipefitter employed by a defense contractor since July 
2014. He graduated from college in May 1991 with a bachelor’s degree. He married in 
August 2005. He and his wife have two children, ages 10 and 8. He worked at various 
private-sector jobs before he was hired for his current position. He had a six-month period 
of unemployment in 2012, after he was fired for chewing tobacco at work. He has never 
held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant began binge drinking around 1983, when he was 15 years old. He 
consumed a 12-pack of beer a day in college. In 1989, he was convicted of driving while 
intoxicated after being involved in an accident. He was fined $400, his driver’s license 
was suspended for three months, and he was required to complete 32 hours of community 
service and an alcohol-education class. This conviction is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
In December 1991, Applicant self-referred into a six-day alcohol abuse and 
detoxification program. Afterwards, he abstained from alcohol for about 16 years and 
attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings regularly. He resumed his alcohol 
consumption in 2008. In 2009, he was convicted of driving under the influence. He was 
fined $600, his driver’s license was suspended for three months, and he was required to 
complete 32 hours of community service and an alcohol-education class. This conviction 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
Applicant consumed a 12-pack of beer daily until March 2010, when he stopped 
drinking and returned to regular participation in AA. He relapsed in April 2014, consuming 
a 12-pack of beer daily for one and a half weeks. He self-referred to a four-day alcohol 
abuse and alcohol detoxification program in April 2014, and he missed four days of work 
while attending the program. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. His alcohol-related 
absence from work is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and his diagnosis and treatment are alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. He has abstained from alcohol since completing the program in April 2014, 
and he attends AA meetings regularly. (Item 4.) 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 There is no SOR ¶ 1.b. The Guideline G allegations are SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. 
 
 3
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges eight consumer debts totaling about $50,563. 
The debts are reflected on credit reports from February 2015 and January 2016. (Items 
5 and 6.) In a personal subject interview in December 2014, Applicant attributed his debts 
to the six-month period of unemployment in 2012, followed by a series of low-paying jobs. 
(Item 4 at 6.) Applicant admitted all the debts in his answer to the SOR. He provided no 
evidence of any efforts to resolve the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
 
 4
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3, 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” 
Applicant’s admitted history of excessive alcohol consumption establishes the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder.4 
 
 The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 22(d) (“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or 
mental health professional . . . of alcohol use disorder”) is not established, because the 
credentials of the individual who diagnosed Applicant as alcohol dependent are not 
reflected in the record. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
                                                          
4  The term “alcohol use disorder” includes both alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse. The language of 
this disqualifying condition was changed to conform to the terminology in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, (5th ed. 2013). 
 
 5
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive 
alcohol use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, 
and has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed a treatment program 
along with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance 
with treatment recommendations. 
 
 All of the above conditions are established. Applicant has abstained from alcohol 
for more than three years. He acknowledged his maladaptive alcohol use by twice self-
admitting into alcohol-abuse and detoxification programs. His relapse in February 2014 
was preceded by three years of abstinence. He has completed two treatment programs 
and regularly participates in AA meetings.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish three 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”); AG 
¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) 
 
 6
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are recent, frequent, ongoing, and were not incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. His six-month unemployment in 2012 was 
caused by his own misconduct. His underemployment may have been a condition beyond 
his control, but it is not clear to what extent his excessive use of alcohol interfered with 
his ability to find work commensurate with his age and education. He has presented no 
evidence of financial counseling, payments, or payment plans; and he has not disputed 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-person concept, an 
administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by 
considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances and 
applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).5  
 
                                                          
5 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 7
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G and F in my whole-person 
analysis and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Because Applicant requested 
a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines G and F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his alcohol 
consumption, but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent 
debts. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
