 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-08615 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
substance abuse. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On August 4, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. Applicant responded to those interrogatories 
on September 22, 2016.2 On November 24, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
                                                          
1 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated February 18, 2015). 
 
2 Item 3 (Applicant’s Responses to Interrogatories, dated September 22, 2016). 
 
2 
                                      
 
and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.3 The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal 
Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 5, 2016. In a sworn statement, dated 
December 6, 2016, Applicant responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.4 A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by (DOHA) on January 9, 2017, and 
he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to 
the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the previous 
Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on February 
3, 2017. Applicant’s response was due on March 5, 2017. Applicant failed to submit any 
response. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to drug involvement (¶ 1.a.) and personal conduct (¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.) of the 
SOR. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a senior 
laminator with the company since August 2009. He previously held diverse relatively brief 
part-time positions (cashier and account assistant) with a variety of other employers. He 
is a June 2006 high school graduate, and he earned a number of college credits, but no 
degree. Applicant has never served in the U.S. military. He has never held a security 
clearance. Applicant was married in 2010 and divorced in 2013. He has one son, born in 
2009. 
 
  
                                                          
3 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for 
access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were established to supersede all previously 
issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on 
September 1, 2006, under which this security clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the 
two versions, there is no substantial difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
4 Item 1 (Answer to the SOR, dated December 6, 2016). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
 Applicant is a substance abuser whose choice of substances has been marijuana.5 
He commenced using marijuana, usually by smoking it in a pipe, in July 2004 - when he 
was 16 years old - and he continued using it until at least April 2015. Throughout his high 
school years, he generally smoked marijuana an average of six times per year. That 
frequency diminished to one to two times per year once he turned 18. He usually smoked 
marijuana with an identified friend, either in his home or in his friend’s home. He routinely 
contributed funds to enable his friend to obtain the marijuana they smoked. It is unclear 
why Applicant used marijuana for so long for he claimed that it made him lazy, and he 
really didn’t enjoy smoking it.  
 
 Applicant never failed a drug test, and he has never had any contact with law 
enforcement authorities with respect to his marijuana use. Although Applicant claimed he 
stopped smoking marijuana in April 2015, nearly two months before he was interviewed 
on June 1, 2015, by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM), he offered no explanation as to why he stopped using marijuana, or what his 
intentions might be regarding his future use of marijuana. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On February 18, 2015, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to 
certain questions in Section 23 - Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity. Two of the questions 
asked were if, in the last seven years, Applicant had: illegally used any drugs or controlled 
substances, to include injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or 
otherwise consuming any drug or controlled substance; and been involved in the illegal 
purchase . . . of any drug or controlled substance. Applicant responded “no” to both 
questions. In so doing, he intentionally falsified material facts and deliberately omitted 
both the illegal use and the purchase of marijuana. Because of the way the SOR was 
drafted, Applicant’s omission in his e-QIP regarding the purchase of marijuana is 
considered unalleged conduct in SOR 1.a.6 Upon subsequently being interviewed by the 
OPM investigator, Applicant stated that he did not list his marijuana-related activities 
because he did not know he needed to do so.7 
                                                          
5 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Drug Enforcement Administration listing at 
http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Sch. I). 
 
6 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal Board. 
(Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant's 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) 
to provide evidence for whole-person analysis under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, 
n. 1 (App. Bd. Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s contribution of 
funds for the purchase of marijuana will not be considered under the Guideline for Personal Conduct except for the five 
purposes listed above.   
 
7 Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated June 1, 2015), at 5, included in the set of interrogatories. 
 
4 
                                      
 
 On September 22, 2016, when Applicant responded to the interrogatories, he 
responded to a question that asked “[h]ave you ever purchased or contributed money 
towards the purchase of marijuana?” Applicant responded “no.”8 In so doing, he 
intentionally falsified material facts regarding his admitted contribution of funds to 
purchase marijuana. 
 
 Although not alleged in the SOR, Applicant has a history of alcohol abuse, 
operating unregistered vehicles, operating vehicles on suspended licenses, and traffic 
citations. As a result of those activities, he has been repeatedly involved with police and 
judicial authorities.9 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”10 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”11  
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
                                                          
 
8 Item 3, supra note 2. 
 
9 Applicant’s repeated involvement with police and judicial authorities over this unalleged conduct will not be 
considered except for the five purposes listed above. See note 6. 
 
10 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
11 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified.    
 
 
5 
                                      
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”12 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.13  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”14  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”15 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse is set out in AG ¶ 24:       
 
                                                          
12 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support 
a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) 
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
14 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
15 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Furthermore, on October 25, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana 
Use, which states: 
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (Reference H and I). An individual's disregard of federal law 
pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains 
adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations. As always, 
adjudicative authorities are expected to evaluate claimed or developed use 
of, or involvement with, marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. 
The adjudicative authority must determine if the use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana raises questions about the individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, 
including federal laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons 
proposed for, or occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions under AG ¶ 25 that could raise security 
concerns in this case: “(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and (c) illegal 
possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
 
Applicant purchased, possessed, and used marijuana from July 2004 until at least 
April 2015. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 26 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
 
7 
                                      
 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
I have concluded that none of the AGs apply. Applicant’s substance abuse took 
place over an eleven-year period, and the circumstances under which it occurred were 
not unusual. Applicant admitted that he contributed to the purchase of marijuana, 
possessed it, and used marijuana, at least until April 2015. At no point did he ever state 
that he had no intention to use marijuana in the future. He never indicated that he would 
no longer associate with the friend with whom he used marijuana or to whom he 
contributed the funds to enable his friend to purchase the marijuana they smoked. There 
is no signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance 
misuse. Applicant’s actions, under the circumstances, continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes some conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 16:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
 
8 
                                      
 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative. 
 
 Applicant’s numerous comments provide sufficient evidence to examine if his 
responses were deliberate falsifications, as alleged in the SOR, or merely a 
misunderstanding of the true facts on his part. Proof of an error in a response, standing 
alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the response 
occurred. As an administrative judge, I must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine whether there is a direct or circumstantial evidence concerning Applicant’s 
intent or state of mind at the time the alleged falsification occurred. I have considered the 
entire record, including Applicant’s initial and subsequent comments.16 As noted above, 
Applicant omitted and concealed his lengthy period of marijuana use when he falsely 
answered the drug-related questions in Section 23 of his e-QIP in February 2015. He 
subsequently admitted that his actions were deliberate. When questioned by the OPM 
investigator in June 2015, he was at least more candid when he admitted the multi-year 
period of marijuana use. However, when responding to the interrogatories in September 
2016, he again omitted and concealed his repeated contributions of funds to purchase 
marijuana over that multi-year period. He subsequently admitted that his actions were 
deliberate. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) have been established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
                                                          
16 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See 
also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of education and other 
experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to disclose past-due debts on a security 
clearance application was deliberate).  
 
 
9 
                                      
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
I have concluded that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s repeated 
falsifications related to his lengthy period of marijuana use, with the most recent such 
falsification occurring in September 2016, were deliberate. A key component of the 
protection of classified information is reliance on security clearance holders to accurately 
report potential compromise of classified information. A person who has offered false 
statements regarding past actions cannot be relied upon to report potential compromise 
of classified information. Applicant’s actions, or relative inaction, under the circumstances 
casts substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
                                      
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.17   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. There is no evidence of 
misuse of information technology systems, or mishandling protected information. 
Applicant candidly acknowledged his lengthy and frequent association with marijuana to 
the OPM investigator in June 2015. He has abstained from further marijuana use since 
April 2015. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant purchased, possessed, and used marijuana from July 2004 until at least April 
2015. He deliberately omitted and concealed his lengthy period of marijuana use when 
he falsely answered the drug-related questions in his February 2015 e-QIP. When 
responding to interrogatories in September 2016, he again deliberately omitted and 
concealed his repeated contributions of funds to purchase marijuana over a multi-year 
period. At no point did Applicant ever state that he had no intention to use marijuana in 
the future; or that he would no longer associate with the friend with whom he used 
marijuana or to whom he contributed the funds to enable his friend to purchase the 
marijuana they smoked. There is no signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse.  
 
As stated in the DNI memorandum cited above, “an individual's disregard of federal 
law pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains adjudicatively 
relevant in national security determinations.” Applicant has a history of ignoring 
established rules and regulations related to drugs, alcohol abuse, operating unregistered 
vehicles, operating vehicles on suspended licenses, and traffic citations. With the 
exception of his marijuana use, as a result of those other activities, he has been 
repeatedly involved with police and judicial authorities. Such a history leaves little room 
for confidence that an individual is a good candidate for security clearance eligibility. It 
should also be noted that Applicant offered no character references to attest to his 
honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
                                                          
17 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement 
and substance misuse and personal conduct. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 
2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
