 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-06981  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 19, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 8, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On May 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
dated September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on May 25, 2016. He admitted all the 
SOR allegations with some explanation. He requested that his case be decided by an 
administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On June 27, 2016, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A complete copy of the 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was mailed to Applicant soon 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
thereafter. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of 
the FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM (Response) on November 7, 2016. He did not 
object to Items 1 through 5. Applicant also submitted additional information in his FORM 
response, to which Department Counsel had no objection. DOHA assigned the case to 
me on July 11, 2017. Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s 
response to the FORM is marked as exhibit (AppX) A and is also admitted.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 In the FORM, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Iraq. Department Counsel provided a seven-page summary of the facts, 
supported by cited source documents. I take administrative notice of the facts included 
in the summary of the facts. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. (Item 3 at page 5.) He is not married, but has a 
“cohabitant” in the United States, with whom he has one minor child. (Item 3 at pages 
28 and 32.) He earned a master’s degree in 2010. He has worked as a “linguist” for his 
employer since March of 2015. (Item 3 at page 15.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Iraq. She “is a house wife . . . 
[and] has no affiliation with a Foreign Government.” (Item 4 at page 4.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of Iraq. He “works for the Ministry 
of Oil . . . as a mechanic in the Oil Fields.” (Item 4 at page 4.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.c. Applicant has three brothers who are citizens and residents of Iraq. (Item 4 
at pages 4~5.) One “brother works in Sales,” another “brother is a Hair Dresser,” and his 
third “brother is a Student.” (Id.) These brother do not have any “affiliation with a Foreign 
Government.” (Item 4 at pages 4~5.) 
 
 1.d.  Applicant has four sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq. (Item 4 at 
pages 4~5.) Two sisters are “unemployed,” and the other two sisters are students. (Id.) 
These sisters do not have any “affiliation with a Foreign Government.” (Item 4 at pages 
4~5.) 
 
 1.e. Applicant has a fourth brother who is a citizen of Iraq, but resides in Jordan. 
(Item 4 at page 4.) He “works as a Hairdresser . . . [and] has no affiliation with a Foreign 
Government.” (Item 4 at page 4.) 
 
 1.f. In 2009, about eight years ago, Applicant “sent approximately $5,000 to his 
father to help [his father] buy another vehicle.” 
 
 1.g. In 2011, about six years ago, Applicant “sent [a friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Iraq] $500 one time to help him pay his sick wife’s medical bills. . . . [His 
friend] is [an] entry level employee [who] works for [the] Iraqi Ministry of Justice.” (Item 3 
at page 6, and Answer.) 
 
 In his Response to the FORM, Applicant offers written support of a lieutenant 
colonel, of a captain, and of a master sergeant, all of the Marine Corps, serving with 
Applicant in Iraq. (AppX A at pages 2~4.) All three affiants support Applicant’s request 
for a security clearance in no uncertain terms. (Id.) 
   
Administrative Notice 
 
 “The U.S. Embassy warns U.S. citizens to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. 
The U.S. government considers the potential threat to U.S. government personnel in 
Iraq to be serious.” (Item 5 at page 3.) “ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant] is 
conducting widespread, active insurgency in many parts of Iraq.” (Item 5 at page 4.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
 
 
4 
 
 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
 
 
5 
 
 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant ‘s parent’s and seven of his eight siblings are citizens and residents of 
Iraq. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s loyalty, as attested to by U.S. Marines who serve with Applicant in 
Iraq, is with the United States and its mission in Iraq. While his relationship with his 
 
 
6 
 
 
family is that typically of a son to his parents and a brother to his siblings, there is no 
conflict of interest with his loyalties to the United States; and  as such, the interests of 
the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has the unqualified 
support of those U.S. Marines with whom he serves in Iraq. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a 
security clearance. He fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the guideline for Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through1.g.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
