1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case: 15-08554 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
October 12, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant was alleged to be indebted to four creditors in the approximate amount 
of $13,702. He failed to document any of his SOR-listed debts have been resolved. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
Statement of Case 
On May 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
(Item 3.) On May 27, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865 (EO), Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2016. (Item 2.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. On 
October 24, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
received by Applicant on October 31, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
October 1, 2017. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 24 years old. He is unmarried. He has worked full-time for his 
employer since May 2015, and was previously employed in another full-time position 
since May 2013. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted on one collection account (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 
three student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d). He denied the collection account in SOR 
¶ 1.a and admitted the student loan delinquencies in his Answer to the SOR. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a phone company in the amount of 
$416, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This account has been delinquent since at least 
November 2014. (Item 4 at 1.) During his security clearance interview, Applicant 
explained that he disputed this debt because his new phone carrier had agreed to pay 
the early termination fee charged by this phone company, but failed to follow through on 
that agreement. This debt remains unresolved. (Item 7 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on three student loan accounts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
through 1.d, in the amounts of $3,740; $2,340; and $6,842, respectively. These debts 
became delinquent in 2013. (Item 4 at 1 and 2; Item 5 at 2 and 3; Item 6 at 3.) Applicant 
indicated during his September 11, 2015 security clearance interview that these debts 
became delinquent due to “insufficient income,” but that he was in the process of 
 
 
3 
 
 
“renegotiating a payment plan.” (Item 7 at 2 and 3.) His credit reports, dated May 2016 
and October 2016, both reflect that Applicant’s most recent payments on these 
accounts were made in January 2016. (Item 4 at 1 and 2; Item 5 at 2 and 3.) They 
remain outstanding.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant defaulted on his student loans in 2013 and failed to pay an early 
termination fee for a phone in 2014. These debts remain unresolved. These facts 
establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the 
burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
financial problems have been ongoing since 2013. Further, his financial problems 
continue to date. 
 
The evidence establishes no mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant did not 
attribute these delinquent debts to circumstances beyond his control. In addition, he did 
not provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances with respect to 
his debts, which is necessary for full mitigation under this condition. 
 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). While the evidence 
shows one payment on the student loans in January 2016, this does not rise to the level 
of a good-faith effort to address and repay his student-loan debt. At this time, he has not 
established a history of responsible action with respect to his debts. There is no 
evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those debts in the record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, but 
failed to take reasonable or effective action to resolve his financial issues. There is a 
high likelihood that financial problems will recur; and the potential for pressure, 
coercion, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
