1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 15-08268 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant, who has a history of unpaid tax liens, owes more than $29,000 in medical 
collection debt.  An unexpected medical emergency compromised his finances, but he has 
made little progress toward resolving his past-due debts. He demonstrates an 
unwillingness to satisfy debts. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On October 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and explaining why it was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
REDACTED
2 
 
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR allegations. He requested a 
decision on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On December 20, 2016, the Government submitted a File 
of Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of six exhibits (Items 1-6). DOHA forwarded a 
copy of the FORM to Applicant on December 21, 2016, and instructed him to respond 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on December 27, 2016. He did not 
submit a response by the January 26, 2017 deadline. On October 1, 2017, I was assigned 
the case to determine whether it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
 
While this case was pending a decision, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was 
issued establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG.1 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel submitted as Item 3 a summary of an unsworn enhanced 
subject interview of Applicant conducted on September 15, 2014. This document was part 
of the DOD Report of Investigation (ROI) in Applicant’s case. Under ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive, a DOD personnel background report of investigation may be received in 
evidence and considered with an authenticating witness, provided it is otherwise admissible 
under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The interview summary did not bear the 
authentication required for admissibility under ¶ E3.1.20. 
 
 In ISCR Case No. 15-01807 decided on April 19, 2017, the Appeal Board held that it 
was not error for an administrative judge to admit and consider a summary of personal 
subject interview in the absence of any objection to it or any indication that it contained 
inaccurate information. The applicant in that case had objected on appeal to the accuracy 
of some of the information in a FORM, but had not objected to the interview summary or 
indicated that it was inaccurate in any aspects when she responded to the FORM. 
 
 Like the applicant in ISCR Case No. 15-01807, Applicant was provided a copy of the 
FORM and advised of his opportunity to submit objections or material that he wanted the 
administrative judge to consider. In a footnote, the FORM advised Applicant of the 
following: 
 
IMPORTANT NOTICE TO APPLICANT: The attached summary of your 
Personal Subject Interview (PSI) (Item 3) is being provided to the 
Administrative Judge for consideration as part of the record evidence in this 
case. In your response to this File of Relevant Material (FORM), you can 
                                                 
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in this 
case. 
3 
 
comment on whether the PSI summary accurately reflects the information 
you provided to the authorized OPM investigator(s) and you can make any 
corrections, additions, deletions, and updates necessary to make the 
summary clear and accurate. Alternatively, you can object on the ground that 
the report is unauthenticated by a Government witness. If no objections are 
raised in your response to the FORM, or if you do not respond to the FORM, 
the Administrative Judge may determine that you have waived any objections 
to the admissibility of the summary and may consider the summary as 
evidence in your case. 
 
 Concerning whether Applicant understood the meaning of authentication or the legal 
consequences of waiver, Applicant’s pro se status does not confer any due process rights 
or protections beyond those afforded him if he was represented by legal counsel. He was 
advised in ¶ E3.1.4 of the Directive that he may request a hearing. In ¶ E3.1.15, he was 
advised that he is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, or mitigate facts 
admitted by him or proven by Department Counsel and that he has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision. While the Directive does not 
specifically provide for a waiver of the authentication requirement, Applicant was placed on 
sufficient notice of his opportunity to object to the admissibility of the interview summary, to 
comment on the interview summary, and to make any corrections, deletions, or updates to 
the information in the report. He was advised that if he did not respond, the interview 
summary may be considered as evidence in his case. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. I cannot presume without any evidence that Applicant failed to understand his due 
process rights or obligations under the Directive or that he did not want the summary of his 
interview considered in his case. When he answered the SOR allegations, he referenced 
some information that “should have been noted in the minutes of [his] last interview.” It may 
reasonably be inferred that he wants his interview summary considered. Accordingly, I 
accepted Item 3 in the record, subject to issues of relevance and materiality in light of the 
entire record. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges that, as of October 12, 2016, Applicant owed medical collection 
debt totaling $30,897 on 27 accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.aa), a $556 medical judgment from 
March 1995 (SOR ¶ 1.dd), and federal tax liens of $12,614 (SOR ¶ 1.bb) and $2,155 (SOR 
¶ 1.ee) from September 1992 and $12,614.09 from May 1996 (SOR ¶ 1.cc). When 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, he indicated that he did not dispute any of the 
items in the SOR. However, he also stated he did not have adequate creditor identification 
to address the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e-1.g, 1.i, 1.m-1.o, 1.u, and 1.aa. He described the 
medical collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.m-1.o as “really a mystery” because he had not had 
any outpatient hospital services since 2012. Concerning the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.u 
and 1.aa, Applicant indicated that he would have paid such small debts as he paid co-
payments upfront. He explained that the judgment debt in SOR ¶ 1.dd was for his son, who 
was 18 at the time and responsible for his only debts. He denied any responsibility for that 
debt. He did not address the old tax liens. 
 
4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the FORM, which includes Applicant’s response to the SOR as 
Item 1, I find it likely that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s ($1,276) from May 2010 was placed with 
the collection agency in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,276) in February 2013. Additional findings of fact 
follow. 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old high school graduate who has worked as an audiovisual 
design engineer with a defense contractor since November 2006. He reports a period of 
unemployment from April 2004 to September 2005 after he was laid off due to a business 
slowdown. Applicant and his spouse lived rent free with his in-laws when he was without 
work. They have been married since June 1989. Applicant has two adult stepsons. (Items 
2-3.) 
 
 As of August 27, 2009, Applicant had two outstanding federal tax liens on his credit 
record of $12,614 (SOR ¶ 1.bb) and $2,155 (SOR ¶ 1.ee) from September 1992. He 
otherwise owed medical collection debts of $425 from June 2006 and $4,840 from July 
2008 and a $3,076 collection debt from April 2007. (Item 4.) A $12,614.09 federal tax lien 
from May 1996 was also alleged (SOR ¶ 1.cc) in the SOR. Applicant did not dispute the tax 
lien (Item 1), but there is also no corroborating documentation for the tax lien in the record. 
The tax liens do not appear on his recent credit reports. There is no evidence that 
Applicant made any payments toward the taxes subject to the liens.  
 
 On July 8, 2014, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He reported no previous background 
investigations for security clearance eligibility, although a previous background 
investigation had been conducted. See Items 3-4. Applicant responded affirmatively to an 
inquiry into whether he was currently seeking assistance for financial difficulties and 
disclosed that he was working through a credit counseling service to pay accumulated 
medical bills after a heart attack and related health issues. Concerning delinquency 
involving routine accounts, Applicant answered “Yes” to whether he had bills or debts 
turned over for collection in the past seven years. He listed 11 medical debts totaling 
$21,655 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.c, 1.h, 1.j-1.l, 1.p-1.r, 1.t and a $192 debt not alleged in the SOR). 
Applicant indicated that all but two of the debts were being repaid under a payment plan 
requiring $217 monthly payments. He was working with the credit counseling service to 
include the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h in a repayment plan. He stated that the $14,804 hospital 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.k) was in dispute because his medical insurer should have paid the debt. He 
explained that he was “trying to determine why this was not submitted to insurance if and 
why it was declined.” (Item 2.) 
 
 On September 15, 2014, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He apparently was confronted about 11 past-
due medical debts that had been listed on a credit report that was not included in the 
FORM. The accounts were identified only as “medical” and did not provide enough 
information about the creditor for Applicant to recognize them. Applicant explained that he 
incurred his medical debts from two heart attacks suffered around 2011.  He was disputing 
5 
 
some of the debts pending identification of the medical provider and services rendered. He 
admitted that he was unable to make payments on the debts. In June 2014, he sought 
assistance from a credit counseling service to consolidate his debt and establish a 
repayment plan. He volunteered that after he submitted his SF 86, he learned that the 
credit counseling supposedly working on his file had made no progress and was no longer 
with the company. He indicated that he was in the process of reapplying and had not yet 
been assigned a new credit counselor. Applicant also claimed that he had been informed 
by his medical insurer that he had two accounts, one of which was a “phantom number” 
that the insurer could not explain. He expressed his belief that some of his insurance 
claims were rejected because they were processed under the “phantom number.” Applicant 
was able to identify the collection entities for the debts on his SF 86 and confirmed that the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.c was the same debt as the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s. Concerning the 11 debts 
on his credit record identified only as “medical” debts, he explained that he would have 
definitely paid all amounts under $100 at the time of service. Applicant did not dispute that 
he owed the debts on his credit record, including the 11 medical debts he did not 
recognize. He indicated that he intended to establish an affordable repayment plan for all 
his debts through the credit counseling service and make payments until all his debts are 
satisfied. (Item 3.) 
 
 A check of Applicant’s credit on May 15, 2015, revealed additional medical collection 
debt beyond that disclosed on his SF 86: $35 and $535 from October 2009 (SOR ¶¶ 1.y 
and 1.z); $35 from November 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.aa); $600, $64, and $623 from February 
2010 (SOR ¶¶ 1.w, 1.x, 1.o); $171 from April 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.n); $341 and $56 from 
November 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 1.m, 1.u); and $613 and $35 from June 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.i, 1.v). 
(Item 5.) 
 
 As of August 2, 2016, Equifax was reporting five new medical collection debts: 
$2,053 from January 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.g); $2,000 from June 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.f); $210 and 
$546 from July 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e); and $250 from August 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d). No 
progress was shown on the medical collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c (duplicated in ¶ 
1.s), and ¶ 1.h-¶ 1.o. Applicant was making timely payments toward three credit-card 
accounts with an aggregate balance of $7,361. The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.u-
1.aa were not on his credit record with Equifax, although he presented no evidence 
showing that they had been paid. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of a plan in place to resolve his medical collection 
debts. There is no information in the record about his monthly income or expenses. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
6 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns about financial considerations are set forth in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated 
by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security 
concern such as excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance 
misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
7 
 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result 
from criminal activity, including espionage. 
 
 The Government met its burden of establishing a prima facie case for 
disqualification. Available credit reports show that two federal tax liens were filed against 
him in September 1992 for $12,614 and $2,155. The SOR also alleges a tax lien of 
$12,614.09 (SOR ¶ 1.cc) from May 1996. Applicant did not deny that tax lien, but the 
Government presented no documentation showing that lien. The amount of the tax lien 
suggests that it could be a reissuance of the $12,614 September 1992 tax lien because of 
nonpayment, although it is unclear. Not enough is known about the tax liens to conclude 
whether the 1996 tax lien was a refiling or a new tax liability for $12,614. Whether or not 
Applicant had owed federal taxes of $14,769 or as much as $27,303, his federal tax debts 
are now barred from collection.2 The SOR also alleges a $556 judgment from March 1995, 
which Applicant indicates was for dental services to his stepson, but he denies liability. The 
Government presented no documentation showing the judgment debt.3 Recent credit 
reports reflect that between 2009 and 2015, Applicant incurred $29,630 in medical 
collection debt. Four disqualifying conditions are established under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax 
returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has the burden of presenting evidence of explanation, extenuation, or 
mitigation to overcome the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Under the AG 
effective for any adjudication on or after June 8, 2017, a record of consumer and tax 
delinquency may be mitigated under one or more of the following conditions under ¶ 20: 
 
                                                 
2 Section 6502 of Title 26 of the United States Code provides in part: 
 
Where the assessment of any tax imposed by this title has been made within the period of 
limitation properly applicable thereto, such tax may be collected by levy or by a proceeding in 
court, but only if the levy is made or the proceeding begun— 
(1) within 10 years after the assessment of the tax . . . 
 
Section 6325 of Title 26 specifies that a certificate of release of any lien imposed with respect to any internal 
revenue tax shall be issued 30 days after the day on which the liability for the assessed amount plus all 
interest has been fully satisfied or the taxes have become legally unenforceable. 
 
3 Applicant indicated in response to the SOR that the debt was his son’s responsibility. He listed two stepsons 
but no children of his own on his SF 86. Presumably, he was referring to his stepson. 
8 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem from a 
legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling service, 
and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s tax liens are so old that they are no longer legally enforceable. Although 
AG ¶ 20(a) provides for mitigation when debts happened so long ago, that mitigating 
condition cannot reasonably apply. The disregard of his financial obligations that he 
exhibited in ignoring his tax debts persists in the lack of effort taken to address his more 
recent medical collection debts, which include five medical debts placed for collection in 
2015. 
 
 Applicant’s more recent financial problems were largely caused by his heart attacks 
and subsequent medical treatment, which is a circumstance that implicates AG ¶ 20(b). 
However, Applicant would have a stronger case for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) had he 
presented documentation showing payment of significant medical expenses. AG ¶ 20(b) 
requires that an individual act responsibly once the crisis has passed. While he had a 
repayment plan to address his medical collection debt in July 2014, he learned by 
September 2014 that his credit counselor had made little progress toward resolving his 
debts before she left the company. He told the OPM investigator that he would continue 
working with the credit counseling service to establish a new repayment plan. It is difficult 
to find that he acted responsibly without some efforts on his part after 2014 to address his 
collection debts and with the evidence of new medical collection debts in 2015. 
 
9 
 
 Applicant presented no documentation showing how many $217 payments he made 
under his debt consolidation plan in 2014. As of August 2016, Equifax was reporting no 
progress toward reducing his collection balances, including for those debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.j, and 1.l, which he claimed were in repayment. There is no documentation of any 
payments toward his medical collection debts. Under the circumstances, it cannot be 
reasonably concluded that his financial issues are being resolved or are under control. AG 
¶ 20(c) is not established. To the extent that his payment plan in 2014 is considered a 
good-faith effort under AG ¶ 20(d), there is no evidence that he is presently adhering to a 
repayment plan that would resolve his medical delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(d) has limited 
applicability. Applicant presented no evidence of any arrangements to repay the tax debts 
covered by the tax liens when the tax debts were legally collectible. AG ¶ 20(g) has not 
been shown to have any applicability. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 20(e), Applicant disputes his liability for the $14,804 hospital debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.k) in that his insurer should have covered the charges. He speculated during his 
September 2014 OPM interview that claims may well have been filed against a “phantom” 
account number and denied as a result. That debt remains on his credit record as of 
August 2016. His uncorroborated assertion does not satisfy the documentation required to 
substantiate his dispute under AG ¶ 20(e). Concerning those medical debts in the SOR 
that are identified on his credit record by account but not by creditor name, including those 
medical debts from 2015 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d-1.g), AG ¶ 20(e) is not satisfied by stating that 
he “would need to run down any of the items that came back in May 2015 and especially 
August 2016,” or that he is “especially suspicious to any items that appear on [his] credit 
reports since that [OPM computer] hacking event.” Concerning those medical debts no 
longer appearing on his credit record, it is noted that debts may be dropped from a credit 
record for various reasons, such as the passage of time or the failure of a creditor to timely 
respond to the request of the credit reporting company for information, and removal of a 
debt from a credit report does not necessarily disprove the debt’s validity. Under 15 U.S.C. 
§ 1681c, the Fair Credit Reporting Act requires removal of most negative financial items 
from a credit report seven years from the first date of delinquency or the debt becoming 
collection barred because of a state statute of limitations, whichever is later. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) has some applicability in that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s is likely a duplicate 
listing of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c and does not represent an additional delinquency. 
The tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.cc could well be a reissuance of the September 2012 tax lien. 
Moreover, regarding the disputed judgment debt, a court is not likely to have awarded a 
judgment to the dentist without some evidence of legal liability. However, that judgment 
does not appear on any credit records in the file. It was not adequately proven to be 
Applicant’s responsibility. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In assessing the whole person, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d). The analysis under Guideline F is incorporated in my whole-
10 
 
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The security clearance adjudication is not aimed at collecting an applicant’s 
personal debts. Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). In evaluating Guideline F cases under the whole-person 
concept, the Appeal Board has established that an applicant is not required to pay off 
every debt in the SOR: 
 
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track 
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not require, as a matter of law, to 
establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that 
is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has established a plan to 
resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that 
plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s 
financial situation and evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic.  
 
See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Even so, Applicant has not presented evidence showing that he 
has settled his debts. He provided no documentation showing ongoing payments and so it 
cannot be determined whether he has made enough progress to conclude that his debts 
are likely to be resolved in the near future. 
 
 The Appeal Board has repeatedly held that the government need not wait until an 
applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before denying or revoking 
security clearance eligibility. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009, 
citing Adams v. Laird, 420 F.2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969)). It is well settled that once a 
concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). In choosing a decision on the written record, it was 
incumbent on Applicant to present the income and expense information to explain his 
delinquencies, but also to reflect his financial stability. He has not met his burden of 
overcoming the financial considerations security concerns. Based on the evidence before 
me, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for Applicant at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.t-1.bb:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.cc-1.dd:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ee:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
