 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )       ISCR Case: 15-03931  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 16, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $211,000 in delinquent student loan debts, which she 
has not repaid or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not show that her financial difficulties 
are under control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 3, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On March 25, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 26, 2016, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). (Item 
1.) On July 8, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items,1 was mailed 
to Applicant on July 8, 2016, and received by her on July 19, 2016. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection to its 
contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period he was 
afforded. Items 1, 2, 4, and 5 are admitted into the record.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and married. She received a bachelor’s degree in 2008. 
She has worked for a federal contractor since 2013. (Item 2.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because she is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 3 is inadmissible. It will 
not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant 
conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on July 22, 2013. Applicant did not 
adopt the summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, 
Report of Investigation summaries are inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In light of 
Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, with 
explanations.3 Those admissions are findings of fact. Applicant admitted that she owes 
approximately $211,874 in past-due student loans. The existence and amounts of the 
debts are supported by credit reports from 2013 and 2015. (Items 4 and 5.) The current 
status of the student loans is as follows: 
 
 SOR allegations 1.a through 1.e. These five debts are owed to a private company 
for past-due student loans. The total amount owed for them is $174,549. The last action 
on these debts appears to have been in 2011. In her Answer Applicant states, “My 
husband and I have plans to settle all private student loans in the coming years with a 
home equity line of credit.” No further information was provided. These debts are not 
resolved.   
 
 SOR allegations 1.f through 1.k. These five debts are federally-insured student 
loan debts in the total amount of $37,325. Applicant states in her Answer that she has 
been able to consolidate these student loans, stating, “I am currently in good standing 
and all set to make future payments on time.” However, Applicant submitted no 
documentation supporting this statement. Applicant did not prove that these debts are 
being resolved. 
 
 According to Applicant, her financial difficulties were due to her attending a for-
profit college, where she received a bachelor’s degree in 2008. She states in her Answer: 
 
I allowed them [the school] to fill out my financial aid paperwork for me, all I 
had to do was get my dream job after school and pay it back, falling victim 
to predatory lending. I continuously have to repair the damage I have done 
to my life, my credit, and my name as well as the lives of my family. While 
getting these loans approved was easy, I was misinformed and ill-prepared 
as to the gravity of educational loans and how to satisfy them. 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation concerning predatory lending 
practices at the school she attended. She did not submit any documentation showing that 
she has participated in credit counseling or budget education. Applicant provided no 
evidence concerning the quality of her job performance. She submitted no character 
references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or 
reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since 
she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
3 The SOR contains two allegations styled “1.j”. Applicant specifically admitted each of the two 1.j 
allegations. The second allegation is hereby designated “1.k,” and the SOR in my file has been amended 
accordingly. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has been continuously employed by a federal contractor since 2013. She 
has a substantial amount of past-due student loan debts that she has not yet resolved. 
These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and 
shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due student loan debt in the amount of at least 
$211,870. While she claimed without support that she has consolidated about $37,000 of 
debt, she admitted being unable to resolve approximately $174,000 of debt as of the date 
of her Answer. She offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not 
recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that her problems were due to predatory lending practices by 
the college she attended. However, Applicant provided no documentation to support that 
averment. In addition, Applicant did not submit any documentation showing that she acted 
responsibly over the last few years. Mitigation is not established under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, the record 
does not show clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under 
the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Applicant failed to show that any of the mitigating conditions apply to her case. 
Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant continues to owe over 
$211,000 in past-due student loan debt, and did not show any plan for resolving that 
substantial indebtedness or otherwise supporting a finding of national security eligibility. 
The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the 
evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability 
for a security clearance. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:  Against Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
