 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-07842 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was convicted of felony wire fraud and accumulated more than $80,000 
in delinquent debts over the past decade. He did not mitigate resulting trustworthiness 
concerns. National security eligibility to occupy a sensitive public trust position is 
denied. 
 
On October 8, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 2.) On March 26, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct). (Item 1.) The action was taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
On May 24, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.) On June 28, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
 
2 
 
 
Items. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) mailed Applicant a 
complete copy of the FORM on August 18, 2016. He received the FORM on August 22, 
2016, and was provided 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted an undated but timely response to the FORM, which 
was received by DOHA on September 23, 2016. He expressed no objection to 
consideration of any contents of the FORM, and submitted copies of numerous checks 
that he issued between July 2015 and August 2016, to partially repay the two court-
ordered obligations identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f. On May 22, 2017, DOHA assigned 
the case to me.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s trustworthiness and national security eligibility. My decision 
would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He has worked as a computer operator for the health 
insurance division of a leading integrated healthcare organization since April 2014. He 
graduated from high school in June 2007, and has taken some community college and 
on-line university classes. He has never served in the military or held a civilian position 
with the Federal Government. He has never married, has no children, and has lived with 
his mother in her apartment since January 2004. (Items 2 and 3.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had eight delinquent debts, totaling $90,770.2 
The debts range in amount from a $72,450 Federal criminal restitution order entered in 
2007, to an unpaid $173 insurance premium that became delinquent in 2009. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all of the delinquent debts except the $336 
charged-off credit card alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. He also denied SOR ¶ 1.b, which alleges 
the $72,450 Federal tax lien entered against him by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
in February 2008, apparently because it resulted from and is identical to the Federal 
court-ordered criminal restitution debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, to which he admitted. (Item 
1.)  
 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
2 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege, respectively, the Federal criminal court restitution order and the resulting 
Federal tax lien concerning the same $72,450 debt to the Federal Government. 
 
3 
 
 
 On two separate occasions in 2006 or 2007, Applicant used routing numbers 
from other people’s checks to commit wire fraud and steal about $70,000 that he 
deposited through online transactions into his bank account. He was convicted of this 
Federal felony offense in December 2007. He was sentenced to serve one day of 
imprisonment, six months of home confinement, three years of supervised release, and 
ordered to pay $72,450 in restitution. He violated the terms of his probation in July 
2009, and was sentenced to serve an additional 10 days in jail in April 2010.3 On 
February 25, 2008, the IRS obtained a judgment and Federal tax lien against Applicant 
for the $72,450 in unpaid restitution. Applicant documented that he made monthly $100 
payments to the clerk of the Federal court from August 2015 through August 2016 
toward this debt. At the rate of $100 per month, it will take more than 59 years for 
Applicant to complete paying this court-ordered restitution. (Items 1, 2, 3, and 6; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $336 credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which 
involved a credit card account opened by his mother on which he was an authorized 
user. He claimed that the debt was incurred by his mother, and he did not intend to pay 
it. The record credit report that listed this debt confirms that he was an authorized user 
on the account. In the absence of any evidence showing this debt to be Applicant’s 
personal responsibility, no security concerns were established based on this allegation. 
(Items 3 and 5.) 
 
 The remaining six delinquent debts, to which Applicant admitted, total $17,984. 
Other than the payments toward the judgment debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant 
neither claimed nor documented any action toward resolution of any of them. In his 
response to the FORM, Applicant provided copies of cancelled checks showing that he 
had made biweekly $60 payments toward the SOR ¶ 1.f judgment debt from July 2015 
through August 2016. These payments totaled $1,740. If he continues making 
payments at that rate, this debt will be satisfied sometime in late 2018. (Items 1, 5, and 
6; AE A.)  
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. He did not justify spending about 
$70,000 in stolen funds and $18,000 in unrepaid credit debts while living in his mother’s 
apartment over the last decade. No character references were submitted to describe 
Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate 
his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case 
decided without a hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP-I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions,” and 
require a national security eligibility trustworthiness determination. The Deputy Under 
Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated 
November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply to cases 
                                                          
3 Applicant’s probation violation was not alleged in the SOR, so it will not be considered with respect to 
establishing additional disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶ 31(d).  
 
4 
 
 
forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in AG 
¶ 2, describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive ADP information seeks to enter into 
a fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt since 2007, which he has 
been unable or unwilling to repay. More than $70,000 of this debt was a result of his 
felony theft of funds through wire fraud. This evidence raises trustworthiness concerns 
under these disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Over the past ten years, Applicant accumulated more than $87,000 in delinquent 
debts that were alleged in the SOR. He did not provide evidence that these debts arose 
from conditions beyond his control, or that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He documented no counseling to assist with debt resolution, nor did he 
demonstrate either willingness or ability to avoid recurrence of financial problems. He 
only documented payments toward his two court-ordered debts beginning in July 2015, 
well after he submitted his e-QIP. Other than the $336 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, no 
documented basis to dispute the legitimacy of any of his alleged delinquencies was 
provided. Applicant therefore failed to establish sufficient mitigation of trustworthiness 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e).  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. One of those conditions was established, as 
discussed below: 
 
 (b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s felony conviction and sentencing for two wire fraud occurred in 
December 2007, and he only recently made minor progress toward repaying more than 
$70,000 in court-ordered restitution. Security concerns under this guideline were raised 
by this evidence.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s felonies were committed almost ten years ago, but his ongoing 
financial irresponsibility and subsequent probation violation demonstrate the absence of 
sufficient rehabilitation, maturity, trustworthiness, or good judgment. He offered 
insufficient evidence to establish mitigation for his deliberate, computer-based criminal 
conduct.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a trustworthiness position must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is accountable for the 
decisions and choices that led to his felonious financial crimes and ongoing financial 
difficulties. He failed to demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or 
permanent behavioral change, concerning his history and pattern of financial 
irresponsibility and criminal conduct. His substantial and unaddressed delinquent debts 
establish continuing potential for pressure, coercion, or duress.  
    
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability to occupy a sensitive public trust position. 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet his burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial considerations and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a 
public trust position. National security eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information 
is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
