 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )       ISCR Case: 15-05582  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 5, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $33,700 in delinquent debts, including a tax lien, 
which he has not repaid or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not show that his financial 
difficulties are under control. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon 
a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On February 23, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On March 7, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
(Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 22, 2016, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Answer; Item 
2.) On April 11, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing eight Items,1 was 
mailed to Applicant on April 12, 2016, and received by him on April 19, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not submit additional information in response to the FORM, did not file any objection 
to its contents, and did not request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period 
he was afforded.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions2 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility, and eligibility to hold a security clearance. My 
decision would be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued 
pursuant to the new SEAD 4 AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He is married, but was separated for a period of time. 
Applicant received an associate’s degree. He served in the U.S. Air Force from 1998 to 
2006, and was honorably discharged. (Item 3.)  
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance 
because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
                                                 
1 Department Counsel submitted eight Items in support of the SOR allegations. Items 3 and 4 are   
inadmissible. They will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. They are the summaries of 
unsworn interviews of Applicant conducted by interviewers from the Office of Personnel Management on 
May 15, 2012, and January 27, 2015. Applicant did not adopt the summaries as his own statements, or 
otherwise certify them to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, these Report of Investigation summaries 
are inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, they are 
also cumulative. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 
1.m, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.p without reservation. Those admissions are findings of fact. He 
denied allegations 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s. (Item 2.) The debts are 
documented in one or more of the four credit bureau reports in the record dated January 
9, 2012; August 7, 2014; November 8, 2014; and January 21, 2016. (Items 8, 7, 6, and 
5.) The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted owing a judgment in the amount of $2,437 to an automobile 
finance firm. In his Answer Applicant states that he could not pay this judgment due to 
being unemployed from May 2013 through July 2015. No other information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.b. Applicant denied owing $535 for a judgment to a realty firm. This debt is 
reflected in the November 8, 2014 credit report. (Government Exhibit 7.) It does not 
appear on the two most recent credit reports. (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.) Based on 
the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven that this is a currently 
existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) at least 
$12,418 in unpaid back taxes. A tax lien was filed against Applicant in 2014 concerning 
this debt. He states in his Answer, “I was on a payment plan with the IRS until I became 
unemployed and was unable to maintain the payments. The $12,418 is what is owed from 
the original balance of approximately $24,000 (from multiple tax years). I informed the 
IRS when I lost my job. I am in the process of filing a compromise to settle the debt.” No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
  
 1.d. Applicant denied owing $351 for a past-due medical debt. The SOR states 
that this debt is supported by a credit report dated January 21, 2006. Applicant stated in 
his Answer that he was not liable for this debt because he was on active duty with the Air 
Force at that time and any medical care would have been handled by Tricare. The year 
stated in the SOR of the subject credit report is in error. In actuality, the date of the credit 
report is January 21, 2016. (Item 5.) This error was not corrected in the FORM. Applicant 
also stated, “I am unsure what or who these medical debts are for.” Applicant relied in 
good faith on the representation of the Government in denying this allegation because of 
the date in the SOR. Based on all the circumstances, this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admitted owing $440 for a past-due utility bill. He stated in his 
Answer that he was unable to pay this debt because he was unemployed from May 2013 
through July 2015. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant denied owing $110 for a past-due medical debt. The SOR states that 
this debt is supported by a credit report dated January 21, 2006. Applicant stated in his 
Answer that he was not liable for this debt because he was on active duty with the Air 
Force at that time and any medical care would have been handled by Tricare. The year 
stated in the SOR of the subject credit report is in error. In actuality, the date of the credit 
 
 
4 
 
 
report is January 21, 2016. (Item 5.) This error was not corrected in the FORM. Applicant 
also stated, “I am unsure what or who these medical debts are for.” Applicant relied in 
good faith on the representation of the Government in denying this allegation because of 
the date in the SOR. Based on all the circumstances, this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.g Applicant denied owing $63 for a past-due medical debt. The SOR states that 
this debt is supported by a credit report dated January 21, 2006. Applicant stated in his 
Answer that he was not liable for this debt because he was on active duty with the Air 
Force at that time and any medical care would have been handled by Tricare. The year 
stated in the SOR of the subject credit report is in error. In actuality, the date of the credit 
report is January 21, 2016. (Item 5.) This error was not corrected in the FORM. Applicant 
also stated, “I am unsure what or who these medical debts are for.” Applicant relied in 
good faith on the representation of the Government in denying this allegation because of 
the date in the SOR. Based on all the circumstances, this allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.h. Applicant admitted owing a past-due telephone bill in the amount of $191 on 
account number 900824. (Item 5 at 4.) No further information was provided. This debt is 
not resolved. 
 
 1.i. Applicant denied owing a second past-due telephone bill to the same creditor 
as 1.h in the amount of $45 on account 900885. The credit report dated January 21, 2016, 
shows this to be a separate account to the same creditor. (Item 5 at 4.) No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.j. Applicant admitted owing $1,907 for a charged-off account. He stated in his 
Answer that he was unable to pay this debt because he was unemployed from May 2013 
through July 2015. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.k. Applicant admitted owing a judgment in the amount of $1,975. In his Answer 
Applicant stated that this judgment was “due to marital separation.” No other information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.l. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $9,124 for the balance due on a vehicle 
that had been repossessed. In his Answer Applicant stated that this debt was “due to 
marital separation.” No other information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.m. Applicant admitted owing $1,250 in past-due child support. He stated in his 
Answer that he was unable to pay this debt because he was unemployed from May 2013 
through July 2015. He also stated in his Answer, “I was unable to pay the court mandated 
$1,250 per month due to unemployment. I have spoken with my case worker to have the 
order modified so a portion goes towards the arrears amount.” No further information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.n. Applicant admitted owing $591 to a bank for a charged-off account. He stated 
in his Answer, “The debt listed in subparagraph N was due to an out of state move. The 
 
 
5 
 
 
bank account was closed with a zero balance before I moved and I never received any 
notifications otherwise after moving.” No other information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 1.o. Applicant admitted owing $1,070 for a past-due account. He stated in his 
Answer that he was unable to pay this debt because he was unemployed from May 2013 
through July 2015. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.p. Applicant admitted owing $1,047 for a past-due account. He stated in his 
Answer that he was unable to pay this debt because he was unemployed from May 2013 
through July 2015. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.q. Applicant denied owing a past-due medical bill in the amount of $100 on 
account number 548. This debt is found on the credit reports dated August 7, 2014, and 
November 8, 2014. (Items 6, and 7.) This debt is not found on the most recent credit 
report. (Item 5.) Based on the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven 
that this is a currently existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.r. Applicant denied owing a past-due medical bill in the amount of $75 on account 
number D561562. This debt is found on the credit report dated November 8, 2014. (Item 
7.) Based on the available evidence, I find the Government has not proven that this is a 
currently existing debt. This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.s. Applicant denied owing a past-due medical bill in the amount of $63 on account 
number 213092. This is the same debt as that alleged in 1.g. This debt is found on the 
three most recent credit reports. (Items 5, 6, and 7.) No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information. 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under 
this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant has been continuously employed since 2015. He has a considerable 
number of past-due debts that he cannot, or will not, resolve. These facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
 
8 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant continues to owe past-due commercial and tax debt in the amount of 
approximately $32,500. He offered no reasonable basis to conclude that such problems 
will not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant claimed that some of his debt problems were caused by his being 
unemployed for over two years. However, Applicant provided no information as to how 
he has been responsibly handling his debt since becoming employed. Mitigation is not 
established AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
No evidence of financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source or 
budget information establishing solvency going forward was provided. Further, there are 
no clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Accordingly, 
Applicant failed to establish mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions 
of AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d). 
 
Finally, Applicant did not supply any documentation to show that he has entered 
into a payment arrangement with the IRS, and is in compliance with such an arrangement. 
AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not sufficiently mitigate all of his tax or delinquent debt issues. As 
stated above, SOR allegations 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.q, and 1.r are found for Applicant. With 
those exceptions, Guideline F is found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person 
concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in 
the U.S. Air Force for eight years. He went through two years of unemployment between 
2013 and 2015. However, he continues to owe more than $30,000 in bad debts and back 
taxes, and did not show any plan for resolving that substantial indebtedness. The potential 
for pressure, exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
