 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ADP Case No. 15-060051 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
October 31, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 3, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 4.) On May 11, 2016, the Department of 
Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.2 On 
July 7, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.) On August 31, 2016, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which was sent to 
                                                          
1 The original case number on the SOR has the prefix, “ISCR.” All other documents in the case file use 
the prefix, “ADP.” This indicates that Applicant is applying for eligibility for access to a public trust position. 
Accordingly, in order to comport with the evidence, “ISCR,” is struck from the SOR case number and, 
“ADP,” is substituted. (See, Directive, Additional Procedural Guidance, Paragraph E3.1.17.”  
2 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 
2017. My decision would be the same under either set of guidelines. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant on September 2, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on September 14, 2016, 
and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional information.3 
Applicant elected not to submit additional information. On July 11, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.      
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and divorced. She has one daughter. In July 2006 she 
began working for a defense contractor. (Item 2 at Section 13A.) 
 
 The SOR contained 25 allegations under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. 
The allegations relate to a bankruptcy, failure to file a tax return, and 23 alleged 
delinquent debts. Applicant provided narrative responses in her Answer to most of the 
allegations in the SOR. In analyzing her responses, I find that Applicant admitted 
allegations 1.a, 1.d, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, 1.s, and 1.w. The admitted allegations are 
deemed findings of fact. She did not respond to allegations 1.t and 1.v. I view her 
silence as a denial of those debts. I view her responses to the remaining allegations 
(1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.u, 1.x, and 1.y) I view as denials. 
 
 Evidence for the existence of the debts in the SOR is found in credit reports of 
the Applicant dated November 26, 2014; and April 6, 2016. (Items 4 and 5.) Additional 
evidence can be found in Section 26 of Item 2. The total amount of past-due 
indebtedness owed by Applicant is alleged to be approximately $19,511. 
 
 1.a. Applicant admitted that she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and she received a 
discharge of her debts. The SOR stated that this happened in 2007. Applicant stated in 
her Answer, “I filed bankruptcy on or around 2004.” Item 4 indicates that the bankruptcy 
was filed in September 2005, and discharged in December 2005. I take the date of 2005 
as being accurate. 
 
 1.b. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $377 for 
a past-due debt owed to a telephone provider. Applicant stated in her Answer, “If my 
debt will make payment arrangements.” Applicant stated in Section 26 of Item 2, “My 
Daughter opened [account] under my name and I did not know. . . . This will be 
corrected by my daughter.” Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent. No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
                                                          
3 Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 3 is inadmissible. It 
will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of 
Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on February 9, 2015. 
Applicant did not adopt the summary as her own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an 
authenticating witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions and other admissible evidence in the record, it is 
also cumulative. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.c. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $976 for a 
past-due debt owed to a television program provider. Applicant stated in her Answer, “If 
my debt will make payment arrangements.” Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent. 
No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.d. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $241 for 
a past-due debt. Applicant stated in her Answer, “Will make payment arrangements.” 
She stated in Item 3 at Section 26, “I will start to make payments to this company to 
take care of this debt.” No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.e. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical 
debt in the amount of $1,050. Applicant stated in her Answer, “Will see if my bill.” She 
stated in Item 3 at Section 26, “The [Doctor] that did my surgery ruined my voice and I 
thought that he owed me a part of his fee back. . . . I will start to make payments to 
satisfy my obligations with the [debts].” Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent. No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.f. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor in the amount of $977 for a 
past-due debt owed to a television program provider. Applicant stated in her Answer, 
“This would be two [accounts] for this company. I only had them 1 time.” Item 4 shows 
this debt as being delinquent. The provider is the same company as that in 1.c. The 
owed amounts are within one dollar of each other. Based on the available information, I 
find that this is most likely a duplicate of allegation 1.c. This allegation is found for 
Applicant. 
 
 1.g. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a bank for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $1,749. In her Answer Applicant stated, “? Will verify if my debt. If so will 
make payment arrangements.” Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent since 2010. 
No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.h. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $70. In her Answer Applicant stated, “I will look into this and if still owing will 
make arrangements to pay off.” Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent since 
2010. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.i. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical debt 
in the amount of $412. In her Answer Applicant stated, “? Will verify what debt. If mine 
will make payment arrangements.” Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent since 
2010. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.j. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $281. In her Answer Applicant stated, “Will verify I do not recall ever having 
this [company].” Items 4 and show this debt as being delinquent since 2009. No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 1.k. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $177. In her Answer Applicant stated, “Will verify if I owe will make payment 
arrangements.” Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent since 2010. No further 
information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.l. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $1,310. In her Answer Applicant stated, “Will verify if my debt will make 
payment arrangements.” Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent. In her e-QIP 
Applicant stated, “I [cancelled] my service with the company before my contract was up. 
. . . Will make payment arrangements to get this [paid] off.” (Item 2 at Section 26.) No 
further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.m. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt for 
satellite television services in the amount of $691. In her Answer Applicant stated, “Will 
verify my debt if so will make payment arrangement.” Items 4 and 5 show this debt as 
being delinquent since 2010. No further information was provided. This debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 1.n. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $875. In her Answer Applicant stated, “Will make payment arrangements.” 
Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent since 2009. No further information 
was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.o. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt to a 
public library in the amount of $48. In her Answer Applicant stated, “I will pay this off.” 
Item 4 shows this debt as being delinquent since 2014. No further information was 
provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.p. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical 
debt in the amount of $198. In her Answer Applicant stated about this item, “Will make 
payment arrangements.” This same creditor is involved in allegations 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s. 
With regard to all debts with this creditor Applicant stated in Section 26 of Item 2, “There 
was a time I was having to help my daughter/grandchildren with living expenses and got 
behind on the paying of these medical bills. I then forgot about them. . . . I know now of 
these owing bills to [creditor] and will start to make payments to get them cleared up.” 
Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent. No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.q. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical 
debt in the amount of $109. In her Answer Applicant stated about this item, “Was not 
working now [I’m] back to work I am working to pay off.” This same creditor is involved 
in allegations 1.p, 1.r, and 1.s. With regard to all debts with this creditor Applicant stated 
in Section 26 of Item 2, “There was a time I was having to help my 
daughter/grandchildren with living expenses and got behind on the paying of these 
medical bills. I then forgot about them. . . . I know now of these owing bills to [creditor] 
 
5 
 
 
and will start to make payments to get them cleared up.” Items 4 and 5 show this debt 
as being delinquent. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.r. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical debt 
in the amount of $554. In her Answer Applicant stated about this item, “Working to pay 
off outstanding debt.” This same creditor is involved in allegations 1.p, 1.q, and 1.s. With 
regard to all debts with this creditor Applicant stated in Section 26 of Item 2, “There was 
a time I was having to help my daughter/grandchildren with living expenses and got 
behind on the paying of these medical bills. I then forgot about them. . . . I know now of 
these owing bills to [creditor] and will start to make payments to get them cleared up.” 
Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent. No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.s. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due medical 
debt in the amount of $312. In her Answer Applicant stated about this item, “Working on 
paying off debt.” This same creditor is involved in allegations 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r. With 
regard to all debts with this creditor Applicant stated in Section 26 of Item 2, “There was 
a time I was having to help my daughter/grandchildren with living expenses and got 
behind on the paying of these medical bills. I then forgot about them. . . . I know now of 
these owing bills to [creditor] and will start to make payments to get them cleared up.” 
Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent. No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.t. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $6,812. Applicant did not either admit or deny this allegation. According to 
Items 4 and 5 this debt involves an automobile repossession with joint contractual 
liability. No further information was provided. I find that this debt is Applicant’s and it is 
not resolved. 
 
 1.u. Applicant was alleged to owe a past-due debt to a bank in the amount of 
$300. In her Answer Applicant states, “Is this a duplicate from [allegation 1.g?]” Items 4 
and 5 show that Applicant had two accounts with this bank. However, with regard to this 
specific debt, the entries show it, “Transfer/Sold.” No information is given as to the 
current creditor on the account. No other information is provided and I am unable to 
determine whether or not this debt is a duplicate account of another allegation. This 
allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.v. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $241. Applicant did not either admit or deny this allegation. According to Item 
4 this debt involves a debt to an insurance company. No further information was 
provided. I find that this debt is Applicant’s and it is not resolved. 
 
 1.w. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $774. In her Answer Applicant stated, “I have made payment arrangements.” 
Items 4 and 5 show this debt as being delinquent. No further information was provided. 
This debt is not resolved. 
 
6 
 
 
 1.x. Applicant was alleged to be indebted to a creditor for a past-due debt in the 
amount of $977. In her Answer Applicant says, “? This is the same amount on “f.” Is this 
a duplicate?” Item 4 shows this as being a medical debt, which is not the same creditor 
as allegation 1.f. No further information was provided. This debt is not resolved. 
 
 1.y. Applicant was alleged to have not filed her 2012 Federal tax return as 
required. She stated in her Answer, “Will verify and file if needed.” In Section 26 of Item 
2 she states about this situation, “I did not know I did not file. I had put in the 
[information] on my computer but did not check to make sure it had been [accepted].” 
She goes on to say that she had been notified that she owed $1,100 in taxes. Applicant 
further stated, “I just received the notification that these taxes were still owing so I will 
call and take the actions needed to satisfy my obligation.” No further information was 
provided. 
 
 In her Answer Applicant states that she had medical issues in the first six months 
of 2015. She broke her arm and was off work during that time. She received 70% of her 
salary during that period, but it was not enough to pay her bills. In 2016 within three 
days she broke her ankle and then had to have emergency appendectomy surgery. She 
concludes her Answer by saying, “My goal going forward is to start paying off this debt.”  
 
 Applicant did not provide a workable plan or budget, from which her ability to pay 
her delinquent debts, or avoid additional debt problems can be predicted with any 
certainty. She submitted no evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance, or the level of responsibility her duties entail. She provided no character 
references describing her judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility for a 
public trust position, the administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. 
The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
7 
 
 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to fully satisfy her debts. She 
failed to file her tax return for 2012, and also filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005. The 
evidence raises all four trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 The evidence does not support the application of any of the mitigating conditions 
in this case. Applicant submitted no information that would show how she intended to 
resolve her debt issues. In September 2014, when she filled out Item 2, Applicant 
indicated that she knew she had past-due debts, and she intended to begin paying 
them. When the SOR was issued in May 2016 it referred to several of the same debts, 
as well as others. Once again Applicant stated she would enquire about the debts and 
pay them. Finally, in September 2016, she received the FORM, which once again 
referred to her failure to pay her debts. She elected not to respond. There is insufficient 
information to demonstrate that her financial problems are unlikely to continue or recur, 
calling into question her reliability and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20 (a), (c), and (d) do not 
apply. 
 
9 
 
 
 With regard to AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant alleged that she had financial difficulties in 
part because she was off work for six months in 2014 due to a medical issue. However, 
the record shows that many of the debts became delinquent several years before that 
date. In addition, Applicant submitted no evidence to show that she has behaved 
responsibly with regard to those debts. This mitigating condition does not apply to this 
case. 
 
 Applicant did not submit any information showing that she has filed her 2012 
Federal income tax return. AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply. 
 
 As stated, Allegations 1.f and 1.u are found for Applicant. With those exceptions, 
the remaining allegations and Guideline F are found against Applicant. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to submit sufficient 
information, from which to conclude that her financial obligations are being responsibly 
managed and that similar problems are unlikely to recur. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
public trust position. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to 
mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial problems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.w:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.y:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
