 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-06570 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 6, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 2, 2016, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F.1 (Item 1.) The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive persona 
information. 
 
On April 26, 2016, Applicant submitted a written reply to the SOR with two credit 
report attachments (RSOR A and B), and she requested that her case be decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 3.)  On June 10, 2017, Department Counsel 
issued the Department's written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered five 
documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on 
July 24, 2016. Applicant submitted no additional documents. The case was assigned to 
this Administrative Judge on May 10, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to a sensitive position is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. She is currently separated from her spouse, and she 
has three children. Applicant received an Associate’s degree in 1996. Applicant seeks 
access to sensitive information in connection with her current employment. (Items 2,3.) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists eight allegations (1.a. through 1.h.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the SOR allegations 
will be discussed below in the order they were listed on the SOR: 
 
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgment filed against her in 
June 2009, in the amount of $5,660. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, but she 
wrote that the debt was based on a vehicle that she had purchased, which needed 
several repairs during the six months she made payments on the car. When she fell 
behind on payments for the seventh month the car was repossessed, and she was 
advised that the vehicle was resold. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgment filed against her in April 
2008, in the amount of $1,177. Applicant denied debt in her RSOR, since it was not 
listed on her credit report. (Item 2.) This debt was established by a credit report, dated 
March 10, 2015. (Item 4.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish 
that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
   
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgment filed against her in 
January 2009, in the amount of $434. Applicant denied debt in her RSOR, since it was 
not listed on her credit report. (Item 2.) This debt was established by a credit report, 
dated March 10, 2015. (Item 4.) No independent evidence has been introduced to 
establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
   
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent medical account in the 
amount of $574. Applicant denied debt in her RSOR, since it was not listed on her credit 
report. (Item 2.) This debt was established by a credit report, dated March 10, 2015. 
(Item 4.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has 
been resolved or reduced. 
 
3 
 
         
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,093. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that this debt was 
for a vehicle she purchased in 2013. She did make payments through December 2014, 
even after she became unemployed, but ultimately she could not continue to make 
payments and the car was repossessed. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been 
introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $700.  Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR, and she wrote that she does not 
believe she owes this debt, which was for a storage units, for which she failed to make 
the required payments. The unit’s contents were sold, and she believed that should 
have paid off her debt. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to 
establish that this debt has been resolved or reduced. 
  
 1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $1,025. Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR, since it was not listed on her credit 
report. (Item 2.) This debt was established by a credit report, dated March 10, 2015. 
(Item 4.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has 
been resolved or reduced. 
 
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a delinquent account in the amount 
of $294. Applicant wrote in her RSOR, that she was unaware of this debt, and she 
planned to contact the creditor shortly to pay at least $10 a month until she could pay off 
the debt. (Item 2.) No independent evidence has been introduced to establish that this 
debt has been resolved or reduced. 
 
Applicant wrote in her RSOR that her financial problems began in approximately 
2007, when she and her partner of eight years separated, and she was left to support 
her three young children and pay all of their household expenses on her single income. 
She also had additional family health and death related expenses over the years which 
continued to 2015, when she was hired in her current position.  
 
The evidence has established that Applicant currently owes more than $10,000 
in delinquent debts. Applicant did not submit a Personal Financial Statement or provide 
any other information or evidence about her current financial status. She also has failed 
to submit any positive character letters or any other documents in mitigation.  
 
Policies 
 
The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense Security Service and 
Office of Personnel Management. DoD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made.   
 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
  Applicant had many delinquent debts for several years. No independent evidence 
has been introduced to establish that any of her SOR delinquent debts have been 
reduced or resolved. Also there has been no evidence introduced to establish that 
Applicant will be able to be more responsible in resolving her debts in the future.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c) as 
potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators; 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required; 
 
(g) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that are inconsistent with known 
legal sources of income; 
 
(h) borrowing money or engaging in significant financial transactions to 
fund gambling or pay gambling debts; and 
 
(i) concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused 
by gambling.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
No independent evidence has been submitted to show Applicant has resolved or 
reduced any of her delinquent debt. Also, no evidence has been introduced to establish 
that Applicant is current with all her recent debt, or will be able to live within her means 
in the future. Until Applicant is able to significantly resolve or reduce her overdue debts, 
I find that Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration concerns under AG ¶ 
20, which are found against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to a 
sensitive position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
