 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-06889 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 25, 2017 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 22, 2010, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On June 7, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on a date uncertain. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) On 
October 20, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 7 Items, were 
received by Applicant on October 28, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  Applicant responded to the FORM and 
 
2 
 
submitted seven additional exhibits which are admitted into evidence.  DOHA assigned 
the case to me on October 1, 2017. Items 1 through 7 are also admitted into evidence.     
 
 The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 61 years old.  He is divorced and now married to a spouse who 
resides in Haiti. He holds an Associate’s degree.  He is employed with a defense 
contractor as a CBRN Medical Education/Trainer Consultant.  He is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified the fact that the Applicant has nine delinquent debts, including three Federal 
tax liens totaling about $84,000, a state tax lien in the amount of about $6,000 and 
consumer/credit card debt totaling about $8,000.  Applicant admitted allegations 1.a., 
1.b., 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., and 1.h. in the SOR.  He denied allegations 1.d., 1.g., and 1.i.  (See 
Answer)  He has been working for his current employer since September 2010.  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Army from December 1978 to 
October 1988, and then from November 1988 to June 1999.  He retired honorably from 
the Army on June 30, 1999.  Applicant held a security clearance while in the military. 
 
 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. At some point, Applicant worked as an independent 
contractor and was audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  The audit 
discovered that Applicant had overdue taxes and interest and penalties for underpaid 
taxes for tax years 2008, 2010, and 2012.  A Federal lien was filed against the Applicant 
in September 2013 in the approximate amount of $48,708; and two others were filed in 
January 2015 in the amount of approximately $2,883; and in the approximate amount of 
$48,708.  Applicant states that he originally established an installment agreement with 
the IRS in the amount of $800 to repay the debt.  In October 2017, he established a 
 
3 
 
new installment agreement in the amount of $1,350.  This agreement authorizes the 
IRS to debit his checking account each month for payment.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  The 
first installment under this payment agreement was on January 15, 2017.  At this point, 
assuming Applicant has continued to make these payments he has now made ten 
payments totaling $13,500, and plans to continue to do so until his taxes are paid in full 
and the liens are released.       
 
 1.d. A state tax lien was filed against Applicant in August 2012, in the 
approximate amount of $5,918.  Applicant satisfied the lien on December 17, 2014 and 
it was released.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B and his Response to FORM.)   
 
 1.e. A delinquent debt owed to a department store was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $2,056.  Applicant set up a payment plan of $58.17 monthly that 
is automatically debited from his checking account until the balance is paid in full.  (See 
Response to FORM.)       
 
 1.f. A delinquent debt owed to a bank was sent to collection in the amount of 
$4,721.  Applicant states that this debt was incurred by purchasing business equipment 
when he was an independent contractor.  He has contacted the creditor to set up 
payment arrangements.  He is currently awaiting a letter from the creditor to explain 
payment arrangements.  (Government Exhibit F.)  Applicant has set up a payment plan 
and is paying $56.57 bi-weekly which is automatically deducted out of his checking 
account.  (See Response to FORM.)  
 
 1.g.  A delinquent debt owed to a telephone provider was placed for collection 
the approximate amount of $347.  Applicant disputed the debt since he believes that he 
was charged for movies that he never ordered.  He claims that he has contacted the 
creditor many times regarding the matter.  If the dispute is not honored, he states that 
he will pay the debt.  (Government Exhibit C.)  Applicant has attached a receipt showing 
proof of payment in the full amount of $347.04.  (See Response to FORM.)   
 
 1.h.  A delinquent debt owed to a department store was placed for collection in 
the amount of $719.  Applicant states that he does not know to whom to make the 
payment.  He will continue to try to find out who controls the account to arrange for 
payment.  (Government Exhibit G.)  He states that when he finds the information he will 
pay the debt.  (See Response to FORM.) 
 
 1.i.  A judgment was filed against the Applicant by a bank in 2008 for money 
owed on a second mortgage in the approximate amount of $19,223.  Applicant 
explained that this second mortgage was for his home that was foreclosed upon.  
Applicant’s contends that he made regular monthly payments to resolve the debt until 
February 2015, and had reduced the debt to $15,811.  (Government Exhibit D.)  He 
believes that the creditor never reported the payments to the credit bureaus.  He has 
contacted the original creditor and the new creditor who purchased the debt.  Neither 
party will provide him with documentation to show that he has been paying.  Copies of 
Applicant’s bank statement show that he has made payments and continues to do so.           
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
         Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and 
 
  (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
  Applicant became delinquently indebted.  His house was foreclosed upon, and a 
judgment was entered against him for the amount of the second mortgage.  He incurred 
significant tax debt as an independent contractor and other delinquent consumer debt.  
This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.   
 
Applicant has set up a payment plan that he is following with the IRS.  He plans 
to continue the payments until all of his back taxes are paid and the liens are released.  
He has set up payment arrangements with all of those creditors he could locate and 
plans to continue making those payments until he is debt free.  It is still unclear from the 
record why he has been unable to pay his bills on time.  Whether it be a problem with 
procrastination, or a spouse who was trusted with paying the bills who failed to do so, or  
whether he simply spent beyond his means, Applicant had a problem that he has 
resolved.  He has demonstrated that he understands his responsibility to be financially 
responsible to be eligible for a security clearance.  He understands that he must 
continue to show responsibility going forward.  He is currently addressing his financial 
problems. There is sufficient evidence in the record to show that he has been and 
continues to act in a reasonable and responsible manner.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant has not explained how these debts 
arose.  Furthermore, given the age of the debts, beginning in 2008 and continuing from 
that time, he should have been able to resolve them sooner.  However, given the fact 
that he has recently been most diligent about resolving them, and continues to pay them 
on a monthly basis through automatic payments, and has provided this court with 
 
7 
 
documentation to show his progress, Applicant can be said to have shown 
responsibility.  Applicant’s financial responsibility must continue.  He must, however, 
never allow himself to get into excessive indebtedness again.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
