 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 15-07059  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and personal conduct, but not those raised under the guidelines for drug 
involvement and substance misuse, and alcohol consumption. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
On April 21, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline F, Financial Considerations, 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
(AG) effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new AG were 
implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                 
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 
8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 23, 2016. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2)  
 
 On July 11, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 12, 2016, and received by him on July 19, 2016. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
did not respond to the FORM or object to Items 1 through 7; hence, they are admitted into 
evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 22, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. (Item 2) His admissions are incorporated 
into these findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and divorced twice. He has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2014. (Item 4)  
 
 On April 9, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). In 
it he disclosed the following information: that he used and purchased marijuana with 
varying frequency between September 1995 to February 2015; that he tested positive for 
THC (marijuana) on a drug urinalysis in September 2014; that he was indebted to a 
company for an automobile loan in the amount of $15,000; and that between April 1995 
and January 2015, he consumed alcohol heavily because of his relationship with his 
girlfriend. (Item 4.) 
 
 On June 2015, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about his 
background and information in the SF-86. Applicant affirmed that he smoked marijuana 
during the times listed on his SF-86. He said he was fired from a position after he tested 
positive for marijuana in 2014. His family and friends are aware of his marijuana use. He 
was never diagnosed with a drug abuse disorder. He intended not to illegally use drugs 
in the future. (Item 7) 
  
 Applicant discussed his use of alcohol during the interview. He said he began 
consuming alcohol in high school, and sometimes to the point of intoxication. 
Subsequently, he began drinking heavily in 2011 while in a relationship with his girlfriend. 
When the relationship ended in 2014, he asked his physician to prescribe Antabuse. He 
took that for two months in 2014. Since then, he consumes two to four beers one or two 
times a week, and rarely to the point of intoxication. He previously consumed alcohol and 
drove, but stopped about six months ago (which would have been in approximately 
January 2015). He does not intend to drink and drive again. He has never been diagnosed 
with an alcohol problem. (Item 7) In an interrogatory, dated August 2015, Applicant noted 
that he consumed two cans of beer every other day and two ounces of whiskey a week. 
(Item 5)  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In response to a question on his SF-86 inquiring about medical treatment for the 
use of alcohol, Applicant did not disclose that he asked his physician for the Antabuse. 
(Item 4.) He said he had forgotten about it when he completed the SF-86. (Item 2.)  
 
 During the interview, Applicant discussed an outstanding debt he owed for a 
repossessed automobile. He purchased the car for his girlfriend, and when their 
relationship terminated, he could no longer afford payments. According to a May 2015 
credit bureau report (CBR), the balance on that delinquent debt was $17,933. He said 
that if he owed that entire amount he would make payment arrangements. Other than that 
debt and the 2005 bankruptcy, his 2015 CBR does not list other delinquent accounts. 
(Item 6) In his Answer, Applicant stated that he is making payments on the debt, and 
listed the name of the creditor and account number. (Item 2) He did not submit 
documentary evidence confirming any payments. 
 
 Applicant volunteered additional financial information while being interviewed. He 
disclosed that he and his second wife filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005. They 
discharged about $150,000 in delinquent debts, which included an unpaid mortgage, two 
vehicle loans, and credit card bills. He acknowledged that they were financially immature. 
(Item 7). 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
AG ¶ 24 describes the security concerns related to this guideline: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
AG ¶ 25 sets out conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);   
 
(b) testing positive for an illegal drug; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant illegally purchased and used marijuana with varying frequency from 1995 
to 2015. He tested positive for marijuana in 2014. The evidence raised the above 
disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 26 lists three conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including, but no limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s history of illegally purchasing and using marijuana spans from 1995 to 
2015. In 2014, he participated in a drug test by his employer and tested positive for 
marijuana. His drug use occurred with sufficient frequency to raise ongoing concerns 
about Applicant’s trustworthiness and judgment. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a).  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his history of illegal drug abuse and stated that he has 
not used or purchased marijuana since 2015, approximately two years ago. He said he 
did not intend to use marijuana in the future. Given his 20-year use and purchase of 
marijuana, and testing positive during a job-related urinalysis, his statements are 
insufficient to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b)(3). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 There is no evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 26(d). Applicant has not 
participated in a substance abuse treatment program, or been evaluated by a health care 
professional and obtained a favorable prognosis regarding his future use of illegal drugs. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began before he filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2005. He subsequently accumulated an additional delinquent debt that remained 
unresolved as of June 2015. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial problems: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he filed a 2005 Chapter 7 bankruptcy as a 
consequence of his financial immaturity. Subsequently, he accumulated a $17,900 
delinquent automobile loan that he was unable to pay after he and his girlfriend terminated 
their relationship in 2014. While the breakup may have been a circumstance beyond his 
control, he did not produce evidence demonstrating that he attempted to responsibly 
manage that debt after it became delinquent. During his 2015 interview, he was uncertain 
of the debt, but said he would resolve it. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he is 
making monthly payments to the creditor. Although he did not provide documentary 
evidence of those payments, his assertion is credible, based on his honest disclosures of 
negative information in the SF-86, and the May 2015 CBR, which did not list any other 
delinquent debts. There is an indication that the alleged delinquent debt is being resolved 
or under control. The record establishes some mitigation of the financial security concerns 
under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(b), and 20(d). 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 sets out the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use disorder. 
 
Applicant admitted that he had a serious problem with alcohol between 1995 and 
2014, which lead him to seek treatment from his physician after a breakup with his 
girlfriend. He acknowledged that sometimes he drove under the influence of alcohol. 
There is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 23 describes three conditions that could mitigate these security concerns 
raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
 
8 
 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 23(a). Based on Applicant’s 
long history of abusing alcohol, insufficient time has passed to determine whether similar 
conduct will recur. AG ¶ 23(b) does not apply. Applicant admits that he had an alcohol 
problem, but did not provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that he has established a 
pattern of abstinence or moderation since 2014 when he took Antabuse to address his 
alcohol problem. AG ¶ 23(d) does not apply because he has not participated in an alcohol 
treatment program or aftercare.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant does not deny that he failed to disclose that he used Antabuse in his SF-
86. However, he explained that he had forgotten about it when he completed the SF-86. 
Given his honest disclosures in the SF-86 about his alcohol and drug usage and a 
delinquent debt, along with his candid answers during an interview, his explanation for 
 
 
9 
 
 
not disclosing the Antabuse is credible. The evidence fails to establish the above 
disqualifying condition. This guideline is found in his favor; hence a discussion of 
mitigating conditions is not relevant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for 
a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and candid 
adult, who has a history of alcohol and drug abuse that raises security concerns, which 
remain unmitigated. While the likelihood that he will experience future financial problems 
appears to be minimal, there is insufficient evidence to draw the same conclusion as to 
future alcohol or marijuana use. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for financial considerations 
and personal conduct, but not those arising under the guidelines for drug involvement 
and substance misuse and alcohol consumption. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:            Against Applicant 
 
                 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
      Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:            For Applicant 
 
       Paragraph 3, Guideline G:       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraph 3.a:            Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:           FOR APPLICANT 
 
         Subparagraph 4.a:            For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
