 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 15-04970 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark L. Leemon, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient evidence of progress towards resolution of her 
financial issues. She paid two debts, and two debts are in established payment plans. 
She did not intentionally fail to disclose her delinquent debts on her Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA) with intent to 
deceive. Financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On October 9, 2014, Applicant signed her SCA. Government Exhibit (GE) 1. On 
January 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under Executive Order (Exec. 
Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility 
for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 2006. Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 2. The SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations 
and personal conduct guidelines. HE 2. 
 
On January 28, 2016, Applicant provided a response to the SOR, and she 
requested a hearing. HE 3. On August 15, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to 
 
2 
                                         
 
proceed. On April 17, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On April 25, 2017, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing 
for May 18, 2017. HE 1. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.   
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 4 exhibits; Applicant offered 10 
exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
Transcript (Tr.) 18-19; GE 1-4; Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-J. On May 31, 2017, DOHA 
received a copy of the hearing transcript.  
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she denied the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d and 2.a. HE 3. She also provided extenuating and mitigating information. HE 
3.   
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. Tr. 59. She was in the Reserve Officer’s Training Corps 
in college, and she was commissioned as an Army second lieutenant in the Medical 
Service Corps. Tr. 20. In 1982, she received a bachelor’s degree in microbiology. Tr. 60. 
She received a medical technology degree, and in 2008, she received a master’s degree 
in clinical research administration. Tr. 19, 60. She served as an active duty Army officer 
from 1982 to 1992. Tr. 20-22, 60. She received an honorable discharge as a captain. Tr. 
60. After leaving the Army, she worked for the Public Health Service and the Food and 
Drug Administration. Tr. 23. Since 2005, she has worked for her current employer, and in 
March 2016, she started working in her current position. Tr. 37. 
  
 Applicant was married from 1986 to 1987. Tr. 59. She married her current spouse 
in 1992. Tr. 59. Her children were born in 1993 and 2000. Tr. 60. The Federal Government 
has employed Applicant’s husband for 35 years. Tr. 36. When the government shutdown 
occurred in 2012, he was sent home. He struggled with problems with their son and from 
depression. Tr. 37-38. His depression contributed to her financial problems.   
 
  
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s current salary is $141,000. Tr. 37. Immediately after receipt of the SOR, 
she hired a credit report correction service (CRCS) to dispute erroneous entries on her 
credit report. Tr. 28, 31-32, 51-52. She asked CRCS to verify every negative entry on her 
credit report. Tr. 51. She has paid CRCS $99 monthly since she received the SOR. Tr. 
58. Her overall statement made it clear that in 2014 she did not have a good 
understanding of her finances. She did not know whether and when her husband made 
payments on many of their debts.    
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $15,824, and their status is 
as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a is a charged-off bank debt for $1,992. Applicant used a payment plan 
and paid this debt. Tr. 48-50, 77. A debt to this creditor is not reflected on her current 
credit report. Tr. 77; GE 4. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b is a home improvement store debt placed for collection for $1,380. 
Applicant paid this debt in 2014. Tr. 30-31, 52; AE I. This debt is not reflected on her 
current credit report. GE 4.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a second mortgage debt for $100,000, which is delinquent in the 
amount of $6,148. Tr. 31. In 1995, Applicant and her spouse purchased their residence. 
Tr. 54. In 2006, Applicant and her husband refinanced their mortgage, and they borrowed 
$400,000 on a first mortgage and $100,000 on their second mortgage. Tr. 54, 86. Around 
2015, Applicant consolidated her first and second mortgage, and her mortgage is current. 
Tr. 31, 54-55, 74, 85-88; AE B-AE D. Property records indicate the second mortgage lien 
on her home was released. Tr. 73. The lien release means the debt is paid. Tr. 73. The 
second mortgage was probably substantially discounted when it was merged into her first 
mortgage because the current mortgage is $395,322. Tr. 84-88; AE E. Applicant was 
unable to explain how much the second mortgage was discounted when it was merged 
into her first mortgage.   
 
SOR ¶ 1.d is a charged-off store debt for $6,304. In February 2015, Applicant and 
the creditor agreed upon a $229 monthly payment plan; she is current on the payment 
plan; and the balance as of May 2017 is $2,177. Tr. 29; AE J. 
 
Applicant’s May 17, 2017 Equifax credit report lists 25 accounts, and none of the 
accounts show any past due amounts. GE 4. The only SOR creditor on her May 17, 2017 
credit report is the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d, and the entry for the creditor shows a zero 
balance and zero past due; however, the status indicates the debt is charged off even 
though she is making payments to the original creditor. GE 4. Applicant’s May 6, 2017 
FICO score is 677 for a rating of fair to good. AE F.  
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement shows: monthly net income of $15,771; 
monthly expenses of $5,529; monthly debt payments of $5,560; and monthly net 
 
4 
                                         
 
remainder of $4,682. AE E. Applicant has ample income to keep all of her debts in current 
status. 
  
Applicant and her husband had joint credit cards and joint accounts. Tr. 61. Bills 
were paid on an ad hoc basis with her husband sometimes paying them, and Applicant 
sometimes paying them. Tr. 61. Applicant does not have a credit card. Tr. 33. She is 
current on her car loan and the family time share. Tr. 33. She does not have any 
delinquent debts. Tr. 57. All of her tax returns were timely filed. Tr. 57.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In October 2014, Applicant was extremely busy working on a short-suspense 
project for the Pentagon when she was notified that she needed to complete her SCA. 
Tr. 25, 62. She allocated her lunch hour over three to five days to complete her SCA. Tr. 
25, 44-46. She focused on collecting the correct contact information for her relatives and 
references on her SCA. She had never reviewed her credit report, and she did not 
understand the definition of “charge off” before learning of the SOR allegations. There is 
no standard definition of “charge off,” and creditors do not necessarily inform debtors 
when a debt is placed in charged-off status. Tr. 75. She did not receive any help from her 
security officer in the completion of her SCA. Tr. 46. She did not give her SCA the careful 
attention it deserved. Tr. 62. 
 
Applicant’s October 9, 2014 SCA asked whether she was currently delinquent over 
120 days on any debts, and in the last seven years has she been delinquent over 120 
days on any debts, had debts charged off, defaulted on debts, or had debts placed for 
collection. GE 1. She neglected to disclose the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.d. Tr. 26-27, 34. She had additional non-SOR charged-off debts listed in her October 
17, 2014 credit report. GE 4. Several of the negative entries were errors, and the CRCS 
succeeded in getting the incorrect negative entries removed from her credit report. She 
was aware that some debts were occasionally late a few days. Tr. 47. In some instances, 
creditors contacted her, and told her a debt was going to collections. She believed she 
set up a payment plan before the debt went into collections. Tr. 64-65. She was surprised 
that she had delinquent debts that met the reporting criteria in her SCA. Tr. 26. She was 
unaware that she had any debts that were 120 days delinquent, charged off, defaulted, 
or in collections. Tr. 26, 47, 63. An expert witness on financial reports explained that 
Applicant’s credit reports are consistent with her description of learning a debt was 
delinquent, and then starting a payment plan without knowing the creditor had turned the 
debt in to a credit reporting company as “charged off” or in collections. Tr. 75-76. 
 
The next time Applicant completes an SCA, she will review her credit report first, 
and ensure her SCA is accurate. Tr. 34. She will ensure she allocates sufficient time to 
complete her SCA. Tr. 34.    
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s division manager said Applicant has been a reliable and trustworthy 
employee since 2005. AE G. Her section chief described Applicant as a professional, 
 
5 
                                         
 
reliable, and responsible employee who provides critical support to her employer and 
DOD. AE H. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
6 
                                         
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
 
7 
                                         
 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). AG ¶ 19(a) is not established because Applicant had ample 
financial income available to pay her debts. AG ¶ 19(b) is not established because 
Applicant showed she was willing to pay her debts. The record establishes the 
disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(c) because she has a history of delinquent debt, and 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;4 and 
 
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
4 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in 
order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
                                         
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
Applicant employed CRCS to ensure her credit report is accurate. Her SOR listed 
four debts. Two debts were paid; one debt is in a payment plan; her second mortgage 
was merged into her first mortgage; and her first mortgage is current. All of her delinquent 
debts are now current or paid. AG ¶ 20(a) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Based on Applicant’s track record of paying or resolving her debts, future 
delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on [Applicant’s] current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control.” Her payments to address her debts showed 
good faith. She has sufficient income to keep her debts in current status and to continue 
making progress paying her remaining debts. Applicant assures she will conscientiously 
endeavor to maintain her financial responsibility. Her efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 
9 
                                         
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations, . . . 
[to] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . . .”5 Applicant’s October 
9, 2014 SCA asked whether she was currently delinquent over 120 days on any debts, in 
the last seven years has she been delinquent over 120 days on debts, had debts charged 
off, defaulted on debts, or had debts placed for collection. She neglected to disclose the 
delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d and possibly additional non-SOR charged-
off debts listed in her October 17, 2014 credit report. Several of the negative entries were 
errors, and the CRCS succeeding in getting the incorrect negative entries removed from 
her credit report. In 2014, Applicant lacked knowledge of the true status of her debts. She 
was unaware that she had any debts that were 120 days delinquent, charged off, 
defaulted, or in collections. Applicant was surprised that she had delinquent debts that 
met the reporting criteria in her SCA.  
 
Applicant’s statements that she honestly and sincerely believed her answers to 
questions on the SCA were accurate to the best of her knowledge are credible. Her 
husband handled some of the family finances and paid some of the family debts. She had 
an obligation to make reasonable inquiries to obtain correct information for her SCA, and 
she was negligent in her preparation of her SCA. Her handling of her finances was also 
negligent. In 2014, her work and her family situation distracted her from giving her 
finances and SCA the attention they required. Applicant did not intend to deceive security 
officials about her finances. She has ample income to maintain all of her debts in current 
status. She refuted the allegation that she intentionally failed to disclose information about 
her delinquent debts, and she mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                            
5 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden 
of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
10 
                                         
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F and 
E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 59 years old. In 1982, she received a bachelor’s degree in 
microbiology. She received a medical technology degree, and in 2008, she received a 
master’s degree in clinical research administration. She served as an active duty Army 
officer from 1982 to 1992, and she received an honorable discharge as a captain. After 
leaving the Army, she worked for the Public Health Service and the Food and Drug 
Administration. Since 2005, she has worked for her current employer, and in March 2016, 
she started working in her current position. Applicant’s division manager said Applicant 
has been a reliable and trustworthy employee since 2005. Her section chief described 
Applicant as a professional, reliable, and responsible employee who provides critical 
support to her employer and DOD.  
 
The Federal Government has employed Applicant’s husband for 35 years. When 
the government shutdown occurred in 2012, he was sent home. He had problems with 
their son, and he suffered from depression. His depression contributed to her financial 
problems. Applicant and her husband held joint bank and credit accounts, and they 
shared the responsibility for paying the family debts.    
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges four delinquent debts. She paid two SOR debts, and the 
other two debts are in established payment plans. Applicant’s other payment plans are 
current, and her most recent credit report of record does not show any delinquent debts. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and 
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the 
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
 
11 
                                         
 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and quotation 
marks omitted). She understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her 
financial responsibility. She took reasonable actions under her particular financial 
circumstances to address her delinquent debts. Applicant has established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment, and she assures she will maintain her financial 
responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. It is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant security 
clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
