 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-04736 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 27, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application in 
connection with his prospective employment as a contractor (linguist) for the U.S. military 
in Iraq. He had worked for the U.S. military in a similar capacity from 2004 to 2011. He 
reported on the application and discussed with a security clearance investigator that his 
siblings remained in Iraq and he spoke with them on a regular basis. (Items 3-4.)  
 
On December 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging that Applicant’s connections to and contact with his siblings in 
Iraq raised a security concern under the foreign influence guideline. Applicant answered 
the SOR on April 20, 2016, admitting the allegations that his siblings are residents and 
citizens of Iraq.1 He declined the opportunity to present his case at a hearing. Instead, he 
elected to have his case decided on the written record. (Items 1 and 2.) 
                                                          
1 Applicant denied the allegation that his then-girlfriend, now wife was a citizen and resident of Iraq. He 
provided documentation showing that she is a naturalized U.S. citizen. This foreign influence allegation is 
decided in Applicant’s favor and will not be further discussed.  
 
2 
 
 On December 14, 2016, Department Counsel sent Applicant the Government’s 
written case, known as a file of relevant material (FORM). With the FORM, Department 
Counsel forwarded to Applicant five exhibits (Items 1 – 5) that the Government offers for 
admission into the record. Applicant received the FORM and accompanying exhibits on 
December 24, 2016. (Appellate Exhibit I.) He was given 30 days to respond. He did not 
submit a response, raise an objection to the evidence offered by the Government, or 
present any evidence about his past work as a U.S. Government (USG) contractor, his 
siblings in Iraq, or professional, familial, and financial ties to the United States. 
 
 On October 1, 2017, after the Hearing Office received confirmation that Applicant 
remained sponsored for a clearance, I was assigned the case. Without objection, Items 
1 – 5 are admitted into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant was born in Iraq. In approximately 1990, he fled Iraq because of religious 
persecution. He was granted asylum by the United States in approximately 1997, and 
became a U.S. citizen in 2002. He earned a technical degree from a U.S. school in 1999. 
He and his first wife had three children. All three children were born in the United States. 
They divorced in 2012, and he pays child support. Applicant re-married in 2015.  
 
Applicant worked as a USG contractor in Iraq, translating for U.S. military forces 
from approximately 2004 to 2011. He reports receiving a security clearance in 
approximately 2003.  
 
Applicant’s four siblings are Iraqi citizens, living in Iraq. His brother is a retired 
driver and his sisters are widowed. He speaks with his siblings somewhat regularly 
(monthly to quarterly). It is unclear from the record how Applicant’s siblings financially 
support themselves.  
 
Administrative Notice - The Republic of Iraq.3 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. Iraq continues to develop as a 
sovereign, stable, and self-reliant country. The U.S. State Department states in its current 
bilateral fact sheet that the outcome of Iraq’s 2014 parliamentary elections generally met 
international standards of free and fair elections, and led to the peaceful transition of 
power. The State Department further states in the current fact sheet that Iraq has 
functioning government institutions including an active legislature, is playing an 
increasingly constructive role in the region, and has a bright economic future as oil 
revenues surpass pre-Saddam production levels with continued rapid growth to come.  
 
The December 2011 departure of U.S. troops from Iraq marked a milestone in the 
U.S.-Iraqi relationship. Iraq is now a key partner of the United States. The U.S. maintains 
                                                          
2 The information relayed in the fact section is taken from the admitted evidence (Items 1-4).  
 
3 See generally Item 5, as updated by current information contained in Appellate Exhibit II (publically-
available U.S. State Department documents). 
 
3 
 
vigorous and broad engagement with Iraq on diplomatic, political, economic, and security 
issues in accordance with the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement.  
 
The U.S. State Department notes in its most recent human rights report that civilian 
authorities were not always able to maintain effective control of all security forces 
operating within Iraq. Furthermore, violence continued to divide the country and severe 
human rights problems were widespread. 
 
The State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq because of 
continued instability and threats against U.S. citizens. Travel within Iraq remains very 
dangerous, and the ability of the U.S. embassy to assist U.S. citizens facing difficulty is 
extremely limited. U.S. citizens in Iraq are at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence. 
Numerous terrorist and insurgent groups are active in Iraq. Anti-U.S. sectarian militias 
may also threaten U.S. citizens and western companies throughout Iraq. The U.S. 
government considers the potential personal security threats to U.S. government 
personnel in Iraq to be serious enough to require them to live and work under strict 
security guidelines. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on June 8, 2017, 
through Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD-4). ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 
(App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD 
policy and standards). 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
 
4 
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014).  
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1.4 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved by a judge in favor of the 
national security. AG ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. Additionally, the Supreme Court 
has held that responsible officials making “security clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Foreign contacts and interests . . . are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. (AG ¶ 6.) 
 
 A person is not automatically disqualified from holding a security clearance 
because they have relatives living in a foreign country. Instead, in assessing an 
                                                          
4 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony, without actual evidence of disqualifying 
conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an unfavorable 
finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on solely non-alleged conduct. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that unalleged conduct raises 
a security concern, it can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
 
individual’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the foreign 
country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.5  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered all disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including the following:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member,  
. . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual 
. . . and the interests of the United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 An applicant with relatives in a foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable 
hurdle in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not 
required “to sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access 
to classified information.”6 However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate 
security concerns raised by an applicant with foreign relatives is not easily identifiable or 
quantifiable.7 Moreover, when an applicant’s foreign relatives reside in a country where 
elements hostile to the United States and its interests operate, such an applicant faces a 
                                                          
5 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth factors 
an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
7 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
6 
 
very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by their connections to and 
contacts with foreign relatives.8 
 
 Here, Applicant’s relationship to his family members residing in Iraq is not casual 
and the security risk posed by his connection to them is far from a mere hypothetical 
concern. Although Applicant faced the same risks when he worked as a USG contractor 
in Iraq before 2011, he provided no evidence from which I could draw a favorable 
conclusion about the above-listed mitigating conditions and his current security clearance 
eligibility. Of note, the record contains no evidence about his past work for the U.S. 
military, including whether he had access to sensitive U.S. information and how he 
handled such information. Also, there is limited information in the record regarding his 
current relationship with his siblings in Iraq and ties to the United States. In light of the 
limited evidentiary record, I find that foreign influence security concerns remain.9  
 
However, this adverse security assessment is not a comment on Applicant’s 
patriotism or loyalty. Instead, it is an acknowledgment that people may act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved one, such 
as a family member. ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:        Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
9 In reaching this adverse conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept. See generally AG ¶ 2. See 
also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4 (relevant factors to consider in determining whether granting a person a clearance is 
clearly consistent with the interests of the United States). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is not clearly consistent with the interest of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.10 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 In light of Applicant’s past work as a USG contractor in Iraq, unique language skills, and the obvious need 
of the military for persons with such skills, I also considered the exceptions listed in SEAD-4, Appendix C. 
However, the applicability of this Appendix to contractor cases adjudicated under the Directive remains a 
question. Furthermore, even if applicable, no implementation guidance has been issued. Thus, it would be 
inappropriate for a judge to issue a ruling on this issue at this time.  
