 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-08578 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government did not establish security concerns under the criminal conduct 
and sexual behavior adjudicative guidelines. Applicant did not mitigate the security 
concerns about his financial problems and falsification. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct), Guideline D (sexual behavior), Guideline F (financial considerations), and 
Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on July 13, 2016, and 
he elected a decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 11, 2016, 
Department Counsel submitted his file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a 
complete copy to Applicant. Applicant received the FORM on August 23, 2016. He was 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
afforded an opportunity to respond within 30 days of its receipt and to file objections to 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On September 11, 2017, I issued an order informing both parties that although the 
SOR referenced the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006, I would be applying the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective as of June 8, 
2017, pursuant to Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4). I also permitted the 
parties to supplement the record with additional evidence and argument. Both parties 
received my order, and neither party raised an objection or submitted additional 
documents.2 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-3.3 FORM Items 2-
3 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 2-3 without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges security concerns based upon Applicant’s arrest for aggravated 
child molestation (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.); his failure to file his federal income tax returns 
for tax years 2009, 2011, and 2013 (SOR ¶ 3.a.); two delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 3.b.-
3.c.); and a falsification on his security questionnaire (SOR ¶ 4.a.). In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted the criminal charges but denied any criminal behavior. He 
admitted failing to file the returns and the two delinquent debts, and he denied deliberately 
falsifying his security clearance application (SCA).4 After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
  
 Applicant is 51 years old. From 1984 to 2006, he served on active duty in the U.S. 
military, from which he honorably retired. He was unemployed from November 2006 to 
March 2007. After working for several months for a private company, he began working 
for a DOD contractor in August 2007. Since October 2007, he has been employed full 
time as an electronic technician for a different DOD contractor. From October 2010 to at 
least January 2015, he attended undergraduate-level courses. He was married in 1986 
and divorced in 1995. He married his second wife in 1998 and has been separated since 
2003. He has two adult children.5 
 
 On his January 2015 SCA, Applicant admitted that he had been charged with two 
counts of aggravated child molestation in June 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.). In his 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibit I includes my order and the parties’ emails acknowledging receipt. Department Counsel 
reaffirmed its prior arguments in its emailed response. 
 
3 FORM Item 1 consists of the the SOR and Applicant’s answer, which are pleadings and are included in 
the administrative record. 
 
4 I interpreted Applicant’s admission that he “erred” on his SCA as a denial of a deliberate falsification. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
3 
 
response to the SOR, Applicant claimed innocence and stated the charges were taken to 
trial twice, resulting in two hung juries and two mistrials. There is no further information in 
the record as to the alleged criminal conduct and sexual behavior security concerns.6 
 
 Applicant admitted that he failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 
2009, 2011, and 2013 (SOR ¶ 3.a.). In his response to the SOR, he claimed to have paid 
restitution in 2013; however, he has not provided any documentary evidence 
demonstrating that he filed the missing income tax returns. Applicant attributed his failure 
to file his federal income tax returns to a terminated personal relationship in 2008 and his 
mother’s illness in 2009.7 
 
 Applicant’s May 2016 credit report lists two charged-off credit card accounts (SOR 
¶¶ 3.b.-3.c.).  Both accounts – totaling approximately $25,760 – have been delinquent 
since December 2011. There is no documentary evidence of any payments or debt-
resolution efforts with respect to these accounts. Applicant attributed these financial 
delinquencies to the legal expenses for his two trials.8 
 
 On his January 2015 SCA, Applicant omitted the two charged-off accounts set forth 
in SOR ¶¶ 3.b. and 3.c. He responded “NO” to the following questions: 
 
Section 26 – Financial Record 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? 
 
In the past seven (7) years, [have] you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? 
 
 Both accounts became delinquent in December 2011. Applicant admitted that he 
ceased paying these accounts due to his legal expenses. In his response to the SOR, he 
stated that he “erred when he did not accurately disclose [his] financial record,” but he 
provided no further information.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
6 Response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
8 Response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
9 Response to SOR; GE 2-3. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 31. The Government showed only that Applicant was charged and not that he 
 
5 
 
engaged in criminal conduct. The record does not reflect the factual basis for the charges. 
None of the criminal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 applies.10  
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the standards in this 
Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the 
individual. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 13. The Government did not provide any evidence raising security concerns based 
on Applicant’s sexual behavior. None of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13 
applies. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
                                                          
10 Assuming arguendo that the Government established a credible allegation under AG ¶ 31(b), there is 
“no reliable evidence to support that [Applicant] committed the offense.”  AG ¶ 32(c) applies. 
 
6 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local tax as required. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2009, 2011, and 
2013. He has two delinquent debts totaling approximately $25,760, and they have been 
delinquent since 2011. The Government produced substantial evidence to raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
There is no documentary evidence that Applicant filed the unfiled tax returns. 
Applicant has not provided any documentary evidence of debt-resolution efforts or to 
show that the circumstances leading to the unfiled returns and financial delinquencies are 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.   
 
Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to his legal expenses. Although 
these circumstances may have been beyond his control, they did not prevent him from 
timely filing his income tax returns. More importantly, he has provided no documentary 
evidence that he filed the unfiled returns or of any debt-resolution efforts. AG ¶ 20(b) does 
not apply. 
 
Applicant has not sought credit counseling. Nor is there evidence of his monthly 
income or expenses to establish that his financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in a way that 
shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”11 
Applicant has provided no documentary evidence of any debt-resolution efforts nor 
evidence demonstrating Applicant’s financial responsibility. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. I 
find that Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct    
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status,  determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his responses to Section 26  
on his January 2015 SCA (SOR ¶ 4.a.). Both debts had been delinquent since 2011, 
thereby shifting the burden of persuasion to Applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.12 Applicant was aware of these delinquent accounts because he admitted that 
he stopped paying these accounts due to his legal expenses. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant merely stated that he “erred” but he provided no further evidence or explanation. 
Given his knowledge of his delinquent accounts, Applicant failed to provide a credible 
explanation as to why he omitted these accounts on his SCA. The Government 
established that Applicant deliberately falsified his responses to Section 22. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 10 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010) (Good-faith effort to resolve debts must be 
evidenced by a meaningful track record of repayment). 
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 02-12586 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
8 
 
 The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17 is potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omissions of his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. Applicant has not mitigated 
the personal conduct security concerns arising from this falsification. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J, D, F, and 
E and the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant failed to file multiple federal income tax returns, and the two alleged 
debts have remained delinquent since 2011. He has provided no documentary evidence 
of any debt-resolution efforts or evidence demonstrating financial responsibility and good 
judgment. Furthermore, he deliberately omitted his delinquent debts on his SCA. I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.    For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a.-3.c.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a.    Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.13 Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
13 See SEAD 4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(c). 
