                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  15-06746          1
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip K. Katauskus, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate the security concerns regarding Applicant’s finances. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On March 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
 Applicant’s response included an attachment certifying a change of first and middle names to the ones1
included in the caption above. The court-approved name change became effective April 6, 2016.
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the September 2006
adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals who require initial or
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive
position. The new guidelines apply to all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
Procedures for administrative due process for contractor personnel continue to be
governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated substantive changes in the
AGs. Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not
affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 16, 2016, and elected to have the case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 12, 2016 and did not object to any of the exhibit items in the
FORM or provide supplemental information. The exhibits in the FORM were admitted.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated eight delinquent debts (mostly
student-loan debts) exceeding $22,000. Allegedly, these debts remain outstanding.
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations with
explanations. Applicant claimed the student-loan lenders increased monthly payments
from $100 to $200 at a time when Applicant’s part-time employment did not produce
enough income to cover the lender’s payment increases. Applicant further claimed that
the assignee of the loans has since sold the loans and has not to date notified Applicant
of its assignment. Also, Applicant claimed that the private lender of one of the listed
student-loan debts (SOR ¶ 1.h for $797) agreed to a payment plan (date not mentioned). 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old civilian employee of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant never married and has no children. (Item 5) Applicant earned a high
school diploma in May 2009 and attended college classes between September 2009 and
December 2011. Applicant reported no military service. (Item 5)
Applicant has worked for the listed current contractor since March 2015. (Item 5)
Between August 2008 and March 2015, Applicant worked for other employers in various
jobs. (Item 5) Applicant reported recurrent periods of unemployment between September
2
2013 and November 2014, between November 2010 and September 2012, between May
2009 and September 2010, and between September 2005 and August 2008. (Item 5) 
Applicant’s finances
While attending college classes between September 2009 and December 2011,
Applicant’s funded the classes with government-guaranteed student loans exceeding
$20,000 and a private student loan of $797. (Items 4-8) Unable to find full-time
employment after leaving college, Applicant defaulted on the government-guaranteed
student loans (SOR debts ¶¶ 1.b-1.g) These loans remain outstanding. Addressing the
private student loan (SOR debt ¶ 1.h), Applicant claimed to have an approved payment
plan with the lender. Absent documentation of a payment plan in force, Applicant cannot
be credited with having a plan in effect as claimed.
Besides having delinquent student loans, Applicant accumulated a delinquent
consumer debt of $894 (SOR debt ¶ 1.a). Applicant provided no documentation of paying
or otherwise resolving this listed debt, and this debt, too, remains outstanding.
Applicant did no provide any evidence of budgeting or financial counseling. Nor did
Applicant furnish character references, performance evaluations, or evidence of
community involvement.
Policies
                
       The SEAD 4, App. A lists guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into
account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant,
as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with App. A. AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in App. A, AG
¶ 2(d) of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
3
an acceptable security risk. The following App A, AG ¶ 2(d) factors are pertinent: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
       The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  An individual who
is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal
acts or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
4
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent student
loans and a consumer debt. Applicant’s accumulation of multiple delinquent student
loan debts and a delinquent consumer debt warrant the application of three of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶¶ 19(a), “inability to satisfy debts”;
19 (b), “unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of delinquent
student loan and consumer debts negate the need for any independent proof (see
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s delinquent
consumer debts are fully documented in the credit reports and create some judgment
issues. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in such persons. While the principal concern of
a security clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to
coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in cases involving debt
delinquencies.  
Whether Applicant has reduced the amount owing on any of the listed SOR debts
remains unclear. For Applicant provided no documentary evidence of debt payments or
resolution by other means. Without substantiating evidence of payment or resolution of
the debts covered in the SOR, drawn conclusions are warranted that Applicant has not
addressed any of the listed SOR debts by any documented means.
Applicant provided no documented evidence of extenuating circumstances,
good-faith payments or payment plans, financial counseling, or reasonable disputes
with any of the listed SOR debts. Based on the evidence provided, none of the
mitigating conditions pertaining to evidenced good-faith payment initiatives, extenuating
circumstances, financial counseling, or reasonable basis to dispute a past-due debt,
apply to Applicant’s situation.
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has stressed the importance
of a “meaningful track record” that includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
voluntary payment of debts. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)
5
(internal citations omitted). In Applicant’s case, Applicant’s lack of demonstrated
responsible efforts in addressing the SOR-listed student loan and consumer obligations
preclude favorable findings and conclusions with respect to Applicant’s security
clearance application. See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005). 
Whole-person assessment is unfavorable to Applicant. To date, Applicant has
shown insufficient progress in addressing the listed delinquent student loan and
consumer debts covered in the SOR. Applicant’s actions reflect a lack of financial
responsibility and judgment and raise unresolved questions about trustworthiness,
reliability, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More documented
information about Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise resolve the listed delinquent
student loan and consumer debts and demonstrate financial progress is necessary to
mitigate financial concerns under the financial guideline and consideration of the whole-
person.  
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s student loan and consumer debt accruals that have yet to be addressed in
any substantive way, Applicant has failed to demonstrate enough probative efforts to
mitigate financial concerns. Conclusions are warranted that Applicant’s finances are
insufficiently stabilized at this time to meet minimum eligibility requirements for holding a
security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions are entered with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h of the SOR. Eligibility to hold a security
clearance under the facts and circumstances of this case is not consistent with the
national interest.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:                Against Applicant            
   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a security clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
6
                                        
  
7
  
8
