 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-02785  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred some delinquent debts after leaving military service, while 
pursuing professional education for several years. Most of those debts have been 
resolved since he began his current employment, and his financial situation is stable. 
Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, national security eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On March 24, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 14, 2016. He admitted all of the SOR 
allegations concerning delinquent debts, with explanations, and requested that his case 
be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 1.) 
On July 29, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 1, 2016, and received by him on August 8, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM.  
 
 Applicant responded to the FORM in an undated, but timely written submission, 
to which Department Counsel had no objection. He did not object to Items 1 through 6, 
which are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s FORM response is marked Exhibit (AE) A, 
and admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 22, 2017.  
 
The SOR and FORM in this case were issued under the adjudicative guidelines 
that came into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent 
Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered 
the previous eligibility guidelines, as well as the new SEAD 4 AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the currently effective SEAD 4 
AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has never married, and has no children. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree in December 2005, and two master’s degrees in May 2009 and 
May 2011. He has worked for a defense contractor since May 2012, and seeks national 
security eligibility in connection with that employment. He honorably served on active 
duty in the U.S. Navy from October 2000 to March 2004, and held a security clearance 
without incident during most of that time. (Item 2.)  
 
  As recently as September 2015, Applicant had ten delinquent medical bills 
totaling $6,655. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i and 1.w.) As of the close of the record, he had 
repaid all of those debts, except for the two accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. In 
his SOR response, he stated that he intended to continue making payments to resolve 
the $2,324 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but would not repay the $1,750 account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e because it was an invalid charge resulting from gross negligence on the part 
of the hospital that reported the debt to the credit bureau. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 5.)  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 During the seven-year course of Applicant’s undergraduate and graduate 
studies, he incurred 11 student loan debts. SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.t alleged that those 
loans were then delinquent in the total amount of $2,804. Applicant has since brought 
all of his student loans into current status, and they are being paid as agreed according 
to the most recent record credit reports. (Item 1; Item 3; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant received a reenlistment bonus from the Navy, but for reasons that are 
not explained in the record evidence he did not reenlist before his honorable discharge 
in 2004. This resulted in approximately $20,000 in debt that he was required to repay. 
SOR ¶ 1.u alleged that he still owed $3,784 toward this debt. Documentation he 
provided with his SOR response showed that he resolved this debt with a final payment 
in May 2016. (Item 1.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.v alleged a $423 delinquent credit card account. Applicant repaid this 
debt in March 2016. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was temporarily unable or unwilling to repay his formerly delinquent 
medical, reenlistment bonus, student loan, and credit card debts, creating a brief history 
of not meeting financial obligations. These facts establish prima facie support for the 
 
 
5 
 
 
foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those 
concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial issues arose when he left active Naval service with an 
Honorable discharge, and subsequently pursued a bachelor’s and two master’s degrees 
as a student. Since beginning his current employment, he successfully brought all of his 
student loans into current status, and repaid most of his other formerly delinquent debts. 
He has incurred no new delinquencies; living within his means while repaying those 
debts.   
 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances, established professional 
credentials to permit his ongoing solvency, and demonstrated clear indications that his 
financial issues are resolved. The record establishes full mitigation of financial security 
concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who took reasonable and effective action to resolve the financial issues he encountered 
while pursuing post-service education toward qualifying for his current professional 
employment. The likelihood that financial problems will recur is minimal. The potential 
for pressure, coercion, or duress is minimized by the resolution of all but one of 
Applicant’s formerly outstanding debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
fully met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.w:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
