1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)       ISCR Case No. 15-07153 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
October 12, 2017 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant is indebted to 15 creditors in the approximate amount of $27,443. He 
previously discharged debt through a March 1995 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He failed to 
produce documentation to show he resolved any of his delinquencies. Based upon a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
Statement of Case 
On June 5, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Item 4.) On June 6, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2016. (Item 2.) He requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On October 17, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing nine 
Items, was received by Applicant on November 21, 2016. The FORM notified Applicant 
that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me on October 1, 2017. Items 1 
through 9 are admitted into evidence.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and married. He has two adult daughters and a 
stepdaughter. He served on active duty in the Army from August 1977 to September 
1983, and received an honorable discharge. He served in the Army Reserves from 1983 
until his retirement in 1995. (Item 4.) He has worked for his current employer, a 
government contractor, since January 2005. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be indebted to 15 creditors in the approximate amount 
of $27,443. Applicant admitted filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 1995, which was 
discharged in June 1995, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 2.) Applicant also admitted to 
the delinquent debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.p, with clarifications. (Item 2.) 
Applicant’s debts appear in credit reports dated June 20, 2015; April 4, 2016; and 
October 14, 2016. (Items 6 through 8.) Applicant attributed his delinquencies to 
“help[ing] my mother and spouse with their own financial problems.” (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant’s March 1995 Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing identified $27,258 in liabilities 
and $4,512 in assets. His liabilities were discharged in June 1995, as identified in SOR 
¶ 1.a. (Item 5.) 
 
 In Applicant’s e-QIP, he disclosed two delinquent debts (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l 
and 1.m) and noted that these accounts became delinquent because he “needed to 
provide financial support to mother to prevent loss of home.” He also indicated that he 
 
 
3 
 
 
was “waiting to payoff current 401K loans so that a new loan can be requested to payoff 
debts.” (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s October 2016 credit report identified the debts identified in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b through 1.i, and 1.k through 1.o as unresolved. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g are 
charged off credit card accounts that became delinquent in 2012. SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.l, 1.m, 
1.n, and 1.o are charged off factoring accounts that became delinquent in 2012. SOR ¶¶ 
1.h and 1.i are charged off retail accounts, which have been delinquent since 2012. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.n are charged off individual banking accounts delinquent since 2012. 
This credit report also identified other unalleged delinquent debts, including an $11,587 
factoring debt owed to a collection agency. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s April 2016 credit report identified SOR ¶ 1.j as a past-due collection 
account. (Item 7 at 5.) It identified SOR ¶ 1.p as an unresolved factoring debt delinquent 
since 2011. (Item 7 at 4.)  
  
 In his Answer, Applicant stated, “I no longer need to provide financial help to my 
mother or spouse and I have recently obtained some 401K money that will be used to 
start payments to reduce my debts.” (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling, or of budget estimates 
from which to analyze his current financial situation. No character references were 
submitted to describe Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability. I was 
unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to 
have his case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. 
An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having 
to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant is indebted to 15 creditors in the approximate amount of $27,443. He 
also previously discharged debt through a March 1995 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He has 
documented no action to resolve his current delinquencies. The facts establish prima 
facie support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant 
to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s SOR-
alleged financial problems have been ongoing since at least 2012. His history also 
reflects he discharged approximately $27,000 in debt through his 1995 bankruptcy. His 
financial problems are unresolved, and continue to date. 
 
The evidence establishes partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s need to 
provide financial assistance to his wife and mother may be factors beyond his control. 
However, he did not provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances with respect to his debt, which is necessary for full mitigation under this 
condition. He has not documented steps taken to resolve his SOR-listed delinquencies. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable. 
 
Applicant has not established a history of responsible action with respect to his 
delinquent debts. There is no discernable evidence of a good-faith effort to repay those 
debts in the record. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is credited with his 
honorable military service. However, he is a mature individual who is accountable for 
the decisions and choices that led to his continued financial difficulties. He failed to 
demonstrate a basis for finding current good judgment, or permanent behavioral 
change, concerning his continuing pattern of financial irresponsibility. While he made 
promises in his Answer to address his delinquencies, he has failed to document any 
efforts to resolve his SOR-listed debts.  
 
Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts establish continuing potential for 
pressure, coercion, or duress. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude that he did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
