 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-04239  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to pay his Federal income taxes for 2006, 2007, and 2012. 
Resulting tax liens totaling $36,150 remain unresolved. In 2008 he discharged $13,928 
in earlier unpaid taxes and $11,229 in unsecured debts through a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. Financial security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 30, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP). (Item 5.) On March 25, 2016, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR on June 1, 2016, and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 4.) On July 28, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 12 Items, 
was mailed to Applicant on July 29, 2016, and received by him on August 5, 2016. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant did not provide any response to the FORM, file any objection to the 
FORM’s contents, or request additional time to respond beyond the 30-day period he 
was afforded. The case was assigned to me on June 7, 2017. Items 1 through 12 are 
admitted in evidence. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as set forth in Appendix A of 
SEAD 4. I considered the 2006 adjudicative guidelines, as well as the SEAD 4 AG, in 
determining Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, but this decision is issued pursuant to the SEAD 4 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 56 years old, married, and has two adult children. He has held his 
present position with a defense contractor since September 2013; and is seeking a 
security clearance in connection with that position. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
1984 and a master’s degree in 1995. He served as an Air Force officer from 1984 to 
1996, and received an honorable discharge. He was granted security clearances in 
1989 and 2007. (Item 5; Item 10.)  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with some explanations. 
(Item 4.) His admissions are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in September 2006, 
including $13,928 in unpaid Federal, state, and county taxes; and $11,229 of other 
unsecured debts. Applicant claimed this was necessary due to several large emergency 
bills and his wife’s inability to work for three months for health reasons, but provided 
neither details concerning nor corroboration of these claims. They received a discharge 
of their outstanding dischargeable debts in June 2008. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
                                                 
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant said that he thought the 2006 tax debt that 
was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was included and resolved in that bankruptcy proceeding. The 
Schedule E from that bankruptcy filing lists $11,412 of unpaid Federal tax debts for 
2003 through 2005; and $2,516 for unpaid state and county tax debts from 2005 and 
2006. Applicant’s unpaid Federal taxes due for 2006, 2007, and 2012 were not included 
and remain unresolved. (Item 4; Item 6 at 21.)  
 
 While the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan filed in 2006 was proceeding, Applicant 
failed to pay approximately $18,515 that he owed for his tax year 2006 and 2007 
Federal income taxes. He subsequently failed to pay approximately $17,635 in Federal 
income taxes owed for tax year 2012. As a result, in February 2014 the Federal 
Government filed two tax liens against him in those amounts. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 8.)  
 
 Applicant claimed that his unemployment from April 2012 to September 2013 
contributed to his unpaid income tax problems, but the record shows that the 
unemployment resulted from his being fired from his previous job for “reduced 
performance.” He did not demonstrate that this was a circumstance beyond his control. 
He said in his 2014 e-QIP, “Now that I am working, I will be consulting a tax resolution 
agent to resolve this issue.” (Item 5 at 30.) He said in his answer to SOR that he was 
“working with [a reputable tax relief company] to resolve all prior tax discrepancies.” 
(Item 4 at 3.) However, Applicant provided no documentation to corroborate any such 
consultation, or demonstrating other efforts to resolve his admitted tax delinquencies. 
 
 Applicant claimed, again without documentation, that he paid the delinquent $54 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.  That debt appeared on the August 2014 credit 
report in the record, but not on the November 2015 record credit report. It is considered 
resolved, and is not significant enough to create additional security concerns. (Item 4; 
Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant did not document any financial counseling except the credit counseling 
required in connection with his bankruptcy proceedings. He provided no recent budget 
information from which to predict his future solvency, or his ability to make any 
payments toward his delinquent tax debts. He offered no evidence to support findings 
concerning the level of responsibility his duties entail in his defense contractor work, or 
his track record with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of 
security procedures there. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or 
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. (Item 
4; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes four conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant incurred, and continues to owe, more than $36,000 in delinquent 
Federal income taxes for tax years 2006, 2007, and 2012, after discharging $13,928 in 
earlier unpaid taxes and $11,229 in unsecured debts through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
in 2008. He documented neither the ability nor any effective efforts to satisfy these 
debts. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s admitted delinquent income tax issues: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent Federal income tax debts are substantial and ongoing. His 
failure to address these debts in a meaningful way over the past ten years creates 
ongoing concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. He offered no 
reasonable basis to conclude that such problems will not continue or recur. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant neither documented a reasonable basis to claim that his income tax 
issues arose from circumstances beyond his control, nor showed that he acted 
responsibly under such circumstances, as required for mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). He 
offered no evidence of effective financial counseling, or budget information that would 
demonstrate either solvency going forward or an ability to repay his delinquencies. He 
provided insufficient evidence that these problems are being resolved, are under 
control, or that a good-faith effort toward resolution has been initiated. Neither 
arrangements with Federal tax authorities to pay the amounts owed, nor compliance 
with such arrangements was demonstrated. Accordingly, Applicant failed to establish 
mitigation of financial security concerns under the provisions of AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), or 
20(g). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
7 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his choices. He continues to owe more than $36,000 in 
delinquent Federal income tax debts, and provided no evidence that he has taken 
action to resolve them. He provided insufficient evidence to demonstrate rehabilitation 
or other permanent behavioral changes. The potential for pressure, exploitation, or 
duress remains undiminished, and recurrence was not shown to be unlikely.  
 
 Overall, the evidence creates significant doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
